The Project Gutenberg eBook of Satan's Invisible World Discovered;,
by George Sinclair

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Satan's Invisible World Discovered;
       or a choice collection of modern relations, proving evidently,
       against the atheists of this present age, That there are devils,
       spirits, witches, and apparitions, from authentic Records, and
       Attestations of Witnesses of undoubted veracity. To which is now
       added, that marvellous history of Major Weir and his sister, the
       witches of Bargarran, Pittenweem, Calder, &c.

Author: George Sinclair

Release Date: February 16, 2023 [eBook #70055]

Language: English

Produced by: Bob Taylor, Susan Skinner and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SATAN'S INVISIBLE WORLD
DISCOVERED; ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




[Illustration: SATAN’S INVISIBLE WORLD.]




  _Satan’s_
  INVISIBLE WORLD
  DISCOVERED;

  OR A CHOICE

  COLLECTION OF MODERN RELATIONS,

  PROVING EVIDENTLY,

  AGAINST THE ATHEISTS OF THIS PRESENT AGE,

  That there are

  DEVILS, SPIRITS, WITCHES, AND APPARITIONS,

  _From authentic Records, and Attestations of Witnesses
  of undoubted veracity_.

  To which is now added,
  THAT MARVELLOUS HISTORY
  OF
  MAJOR WEIR AND HIS SISTER,
  THE WITCHES OF
  BARGARRAN, PITTENWEEM, CALDER, &c.

  BY MR. GEORGE SINCLAIR,
  _Late Professor of Philosophy in the College of Glasgow_.


  LONDON:
  PRINTED FOR THE BOOKSELLERS.

  1814.




_James Clarke, Printer._




CONTENTS.


  _Relation_                                                    _Page_

  1.  Touching the troubles of Sir George Maxwell                    1

  2.  Being a wonderful discovery of murder by an apparition        13

  3.  The witchcraft of Agnes Simpson                               15

  4.  Proclamation over the market cross of Edinburgh               19

  5.  A miraculous cure of a Dutch Woman                            20

  6.  Strange pranks played by the devil at Woodstock               22

  7.  An apparition appears to king James IV. and his courtiers     27

  8.  A major returns from death                                    28

  9.  Remarkable story of discovered witchcraft at Lauder           31

  10. True narrative of the drummer of Tedworth                     38

  11. A very surprising story of the devil of Glenluce              51

  12. Old mother Jackson’s witchcraft                               65

  13. King Duff, the 78 king of Scotland, bewitched                 68

  14. The apparition of Edward Avon, to his son in law              70

  15. Anent Bessie Graham                                           74

  16. The apparition of Sir George Villiers                         82

  17. Hataraick, an old Warlock                                     83

  18. The apparition of the Ghost of Mrs. Bretton                   87

  19. The servant returns to his shop, after he had been
        dead                                                        89

  20. Wonderful story of one Robert Churchman,                      91

  21. Touching Isobel Heriot                                        97

  22. Anent a Magician at Antwerp                                  104

  23. Concerning a Doctor of divinity that rose out of the
        bier,                                                      105

  24. Concerning some Drunkards destroyed by the devil             106

  25. Anent William Barton, a Warlock                              107

  26. Wonderful accident, which happened at Lyons,
        France                                                     110

  27. Marvellous prank played by the devil at Hamelen              111

  28. Strange witchcraft discovered in Monra, in Swedeland         112

  29. Apparition seen at Gladsmuir, &c.                            124

  30. Concerning one Spalding in Dalkeith                          126

  31. Of the devil of Mascon, in France                            128

  32. Concerning Margaret Wilson                                   133

  33. Information about Janet Douglas                              135

  34. Of Helen Elliot, burned at Culross                           137

  35. Prayers and charms, used in the Highlands                    141

  36. Lizzie Muidy at Haddington                                   145

  37. Concerning Major Weir and his Sister                         146

  38. Apparition seen in a dwelling  house, in Mary King’s
        Close                                                      158

  39. Apparition of a deceased Wife to her Husband                 164

  40. Concerning some Witches in the shire of Renfrew              168

  41. Concerning the witches of Pittenweem                         170

  42. Concerning the bewitching of a Child, in Ireland             172

  43. Concerning the Witch of Calder                               173




SATAN’S

_Invisible World Discovered_.




  RELATION 1.—_Touching the troubles which Sir_ GEORGE MAXWELL _of
  Pollock met with from the Devil and his Haggs_.


  SIR,     _Pollock, 24th June, 1684._

I send you herewith the true account, my father caused me write from
his own mouth, which is the surest relation I can give, either of
his own trouble, or what concerns Janet Douglas, first discoverer of
these pictures. There fell out some less material circumstances in
the family, during her abode there, whereby it fully appeared, That
she knew what was done in distant places, and understood languages.
For instance, when a chapter in the Greek New Testament was read,
she made us understand by signs what the purposes were, (for at
that time she was dumb, whether really or counterfeitly, it is hard
to determine,) and did exactly give an account to myself, what we
did at two miles distant from the place where she was, without any
information given to her which I knew of. I rest your affectionate
friend,

  JOHN MAXWELL.

Upon the 14th of October 1676, my father was surprized at Glasgow, in
the night time, with a hot and fiery distemper; and coming home the
next day, he was fixed to his bed. The physician, fearing a pleurisy
and a fever, opened a vein, and the application of medicaments being
made, the fiery heat was abated; he remaining for seven weeks
together under a great pain, chiefly in his right side, though not
fixed to his bed. There had come to Pollock-town a young dumb girl,
but from whence was not known, who had remained there for four weeks
before, but seldom frequenting Sir George Maxwell’s house, till at
length she came to some more familiarity and converse with his two
daughters. And, having observed Sir George sick and weak in his body,
she signified unto them, That there was a woman, whose son had broke
his fruit-yard, that did prick him in the sides.

And seeing this woman one day in the hall of Pollock amongst a great
many other company, she assured his daughter, that this was the
woman; and the day following, she told the gentleman, That this woman
(whose name was Janet Mathie, relict of John Stewart, under-miller
in Shaw mill) had formed a wax picture with pins in the side, which
was to be found in her house, in a hole behind the fire, offering
to bring it unto them, providing she were accompanied with men to
protect her from violence. At first they hardly understood her, till
she went to one of the gentlewoman’s closets, and bringing thence a
little bee-wax, she plied it before the fire, shewing the dimensions
and quantity of the picture. The gentlewoman regarded not the
information, because they thought it fabulous; yet his two servants,
Laurence Pollock, and Andrew Martin, knowing how much the girl loved
their master, and knowing that his life was in hazard, if this
picture were not found, resolved at all adventures to try whether the
information were true or false; and therefore going along with her
to the said Janet Mathie’s house, one of them planted himself on
the one side of the fire, and the other on the other side, while in
the mean time, the little girl coming quickly by Laurence Pollock,
putteth her hand in the hole behind the fire, and then slips into
Andrew Martin beneath his cloak, the waxen effigy, which had two pins
in it, one in each side, but that in the right side, so long as to
pierce through to the other; that in the left was not so long, nor so
deeply thrust in. This picture being brought to Pollock, Sir George’s
son, without acquainting his father, apprehended Janet Mathie,
procuring the next day the Lord Ross’s order for conveying her to
prison. She, being interrogated touching the picture, after several
subterfuges, alleged, It was the deed of the “dumb girl.”

It was also enquired, whether Sir George or his Lady had given her at
any time provocation to this malice? But it was well known, they had
been courteous to her: and, upon her complaints, had rebuked some for
spreading bad reports upon her name, as not appearing sufficiently
well-founded to a conviction. Only upon the 14th of October, above
specified, before Sir George went to Glasgow, he had called before
him a servant in Pollock-town, that had broken his orchard in harvest
last, who confessed the fact, and that Hugh Stewart, a son of Janet
Mathie’s, was his accomplice. But a by-stander declared, That he
was not now in Pollock land, but in the Darnly. To whom Sir George
replied, I hope my fingers may reach him in Darnly. This was all
which could be thought a provocation to Mathie. No harm being done
in the meantime to her son, whom Sir George to this hour doth not so
much as know by the face, but hath suffered him all the time of his
sickness to live in his mother’s house, even since her imprisonment.
In the meantime Mathie remaining obstinate, was searched for
insensible marks before the Sheriff-depute of Renfrew, and many
famous witnesses, at Paisley, and very many found upon her.

After the finding of the picture of wax foresaid, there was some
abatement of Sir George’s sickness, but not to any observable degree,
so low was he brought. But upon the 4th of January following, his
sickness recurred with that violence, that for four or five days, his
friends and relations had no great confidence of his life. But they
were more amazed on the 7th of January, being the Sabbath-day, when
they had an express from the dumb girl, who was at Pollock-town, but
could not get over the water to the house, the river being so swelled
at that time, signifying, That John Stewart, Mathie’s eldest son,
had four days since formed an effigy of clay, for taking away Sir
George’s life. And when she was called for, she declared, it was in
his house, beneath the bolster, among the bedstraw.

The next day following, James Dunlop of Househill, and Ludowick
Stewart of Achinhood, with some of Sir George’s servants, went to
Stewart’s house, taking the little girl with them, resolving to make
a very exact trial, that it might not be said, that the dumb girl had
brought any thing hither. Wherefore they caused John Stewart himself
to light a candle and hold it, while Ludowick Stewart, and another
did, in his sight, lift the clay effigy from among the bedstraw,
beneath the bolster (the little girl all the while standing at a
distance from the place), but the picture having been made only three
or four days before, and not sufficiently hard, did break into two
pieces. In it were three pins, one in each side, and one in the
breast. Stewart had nothing to say for himself, but that he knew not
who had put that thing there. He was instantly apprehended, and so
was a little sister of his, lately entered into the fourteenth year
of her age, named Annabil Stewart, who was said to have whispered
before somewhat of the waxen effigy. This poor creature proved
thereafter, through God’s favour, a key to the detection of making
both the pictures.

At first she was very obstinate, but the next day she confessed,
“That being present in her brother’s house the 4th of January, while
the clay picture was formed, the Black Gentleman being present,
(which was the name she gave the devil) together with Bessie Weir,
Marjory Craig, Margaret Jackson, and her brother John.” But when
confronted with her brother, she did not with confidence adhere to
her confession. Upon the finding of this picture Sir George did very
observably recover in his health, and all the pain, which was in his
side did, by degrees, wear away.

John Stewart remained, notwithstanding his sister’s confession, above
measure obstinate, until he was searched the next day for insensible
marks, whereof he had great plenty. At the finding whereof, he was so
confounded, that immediately he confessed his paction with the devil,
and almost all the other heads exprest in his judicial confession
after-written; and declared, “That his accomplices who formed the
effigy with him were the same his sister had named.” She also came
to a free and full confession of her paction with the devil, and her
accession to the forming both of the waxen pictures in her mother’s
house, and of the clay one in her brother’s house.

Upon information of the premises, the Earl of Dundonald and the
Lord Ross, granted a warrant for apprehending Bessie Weir, Margaret
Jackson, and Marjory Craig, who had been fellow sisters in the
aforesaid sorcery.

Margaret Jackson, a woman aged about fourscore of years, after a day
or two, confessed paction with the devil, and her accession to the
making of both the pictures, and condescended upon the complices
above named. Many insensible marks were found on her body.

Upon the 17th of January last, a third portrait of clay was found
under Janet Mathie’s bolster in the prison house of Paisley, which
the dumb girl had given information of. But it seemed to be the
picture of some woman, and probably of some of the family of Pollock.
For Annabil Stewart did freely declare, “That their malice was
against the whole family of Pollock.” For turning to young Pollock
and his Lady, she said, “and against you also.” This portrait was
found before four famous witnesses.

The Lords of his Majesty’s privy council, being informed of these
pictures and effigies, the depositions of three confessing Witches
being sent, did grant a commission for their trial, and also for the
trial of the other three that were obstinate. And in regard of the
singularity of the case, they ordered the process to be very solemn,
commissioning for the trial some judicious gentlemen in the country,
viz. Sir Patrick Gauston of Gauston, James Brisbond of Bishoptoun,
Sir John Shaw younger of Greenock, and John Anderson younger of
Dovehill. To whom they added Mr. John Preston advocate, (a gentleman
well seen in criminals, and who exercised the office of justice
depute for several years), a _sine qua non_ in the commission. And
that the whole process might be the more exact, they appointed George
Lord Ross assessor, with power to vote and decide. And further
ordered Mr. Robert Martain, clerk to the justice court, to be clerk
to the process, which was to be recorded in the public books of
adjournal.

The commissioners of justiciary held their first court at Paisley,
the 27th of January; before whom Annibal Stewart deponed, “That in
harvest last, the devil, in the shape of a Black Man, had come to
her mother’s house, and required the deponent to give herself up to
him; and that the devil promised she should not want any thing that
was good: That being enticed by her mother Janet Mathie, and Bessie
Weir, who was officer to their several meetings, she did put her
one hand to the crown of her head, and the other to the sole of her
foot, and did give up her soul and body (wholesale here is bad sale)
to the devil: That her mother promised her a new coat for the doing
of it: That the new name the devil gave her was Annipy: That he took
her by the hand, and nipped her arm, which continued to be sore for
the space of half an hour: That the devil, in the shape of a Black
Man, lay with her in the bed, under the clothes: That she found him
cold: That thereafter he placed her nearest to himself: That she was
present in her mother’s house where the picture of wax was made; and
that it was made to represent Sir George Maxwell of Pollock: That the
Black Man, Janet Mathie her mother, whose name from the devil, was
Land’s Lady, Bessie Weir, whose name was Sopha, Marjory Craig, whose
name was Rigern, Margaret Jackson, whose name was Locas, were all
present at the forming and making of the said effigy: That they bound
it on a spit, and turned it about before the fire; and that it was
turned by Bessie Weir, saying, as she turned it, ‘Sir George Maxwell,
Sir George Maxwell,’ which was exprest by all of them: That this
picture was made in October last.”—“That upon the 3d day of January
following, Bessie Weir came to her mother’s house, and advertised
her to come to her brother John Stewart’s house, the following night
at 12 o’clock; and that accordingly she came to the place, where
she found Bessie Weir, Marjory Craig, Margaret Jackson, her brother
John Stewart, and a man with black clothes, a blue band, and white
hand-cuffs, with hoggars on his feet, and that his feet were cloven:
That she sat down at the fire-side with them, where they made the
picture of clay, and placed pins in the breast and in the sides: That
they did place pins into the picture of wax, one in every side: That
the Black Man did put the pins into the picture of wax, but is not
sure who did thrust them into the picture of clay: That the pictures
produced are the pictures she saw made: That the Black Man’s name was
Ejoal.”

This declaration was made before famous witnesses, subscribed by the
two notary public for her, Robert Park younger, Patrick Carswel in
Paisley, and subscribed by the commissioners.

John Stewart did judicially depone before the justices, “That upon
the 3d of January instant, Bessie Weir in Pollock-town, came to him
late at night. He being without doors at his own house, that she did
intimate unto him, that there was a meeting to be at his house, the
next night; and that the devil, in the shape of a Black Man, Margaret
Jackson, Marjory Craig, and the said Bessie Weir, were to be present;
and that Bessie Weir required him to be present, which he promised to
do: That the next night, after he had gone to bed, the Black Man came
in, and called him quietly by his name, upon which he arose from his
bed, and put on his clothes: That Margaret Jackson, Bessie Weir, and
Marjory Craig, did enter in at the window, in the gavel of his house;
and that the first thing that the Black Man required was, that he
should renounce his baptism, and deliver up himself wholly unto him,
putting one of his hands on the crown of his head, and the other to
the sole of his foot, and that he was tempted hereunto by the devil,
promising he should not want any pleasure; and that he should get his
heart sythe on all that should do him wrong: That the new name given
to him by the devil was Jonas: That thereafter the devil required
every one of their consents for the making an effigy of clay, for
taking away the life of Sir George Maxwell of Pollock, to revenge
the taking of his mother Janet Mathie: That every one of the persons
above named, did give their consent to the making of the said effigy;
and that they wrought the clay; and that the Black Man did make the
figure of the head and face, and the two arms to the said effigy:
That the devil set three pins in the same, one in each side, and one
in the breast; and that the said John did hold the candle all the
while the picture was a-making: That he observed one of the Black
Man’s feet to be cloven, and his apparel was black, and he had a blue
band about his neck, white hand-cuffs, and hoggars upon his legs
without shoes; and that the Black Man’s voice was hollow and ghostly:
That after they had begun to form the picture, his sister Annibal, (a
child of 13 or 14 years of age) came knocking to the door; and she
being let in by him, stayed with them a considerable time; but that
she went away before the rest, he having opened the door unto her:
That the rest went out at the window, through which they entered:
That the picture was placed by Bessie Weir in his bedstraw.” Further
confessed, “That she had envy and malice against the said Sir George,
her quarrel being, as she conceived, that Sir George had not entered
her husband to his harvest service: That the effigy was made upon the
4th of January last; and the devil’s name amongst them was Ejoal:
That the new name given to himself was Jonas, and Bessie Weir’s name,
who was officer, was Sopha; that Margaret Jackson’s name from the
devil was Locas; and that his sister’s name was Annipy; but doth not
remember what Marjory Craig’s name was.” This confession had the same
solemnities which the former had.

Margaret Jackson, did the same day judicially confess, “That she was
present at the making of the first effigy, which was made in Janet
Mathie’s house in October last; and that the devil, in the shape of
a Black Man, Janet Mathie, Bessie Weir, Marjory Craig, and Annabil
Stewart were present at the making of the said effigy, which was
made to represent Sir George Maxwell of Pollock, for taking away his
life: That forty years since, or thereby, she was in Pollock Shaw’s
croft, with some few sticks on her back: That the Black Man came to
her; and that she did give up herself to him from the top of her
head to the sole of her foot, having first renounced her baptism,
and the new name she had from the devil was Locas: That about the 3d
or 4th of January last, or thereby, in the night time, when she had
wakened, she found a man in the bed, whom she supposed had been her
husband, who had died twenty years before, or thereby; and that the
man did immediately disappear; and that this man was the devil; and
that this was the first time she knew him: That upon Thursday the
4th of January last, she was present in the house of John Stewart at
night, when and where the effigy of clay was made; and that she saw
the Black Man’s clothes were black, and that he had white hand-cuffs;
and that Bessie Weir in Pollock-town, and Annibal Stewart in Shaws,
and Marjory Craig, were present the foresaid time and place, at the
making of the foresaid effigy of clay: That she gave her consent
to the making of the same: That the devil’s name was Ejoal.” This
confession had the same solemnities which the two former had.

Upon the 15th of February 1677, the justices being convened again in
court at Paisley, John Stewart, and Annibal Stewart, with Margaret
Jackson, did adhere to their former judicial confession; but Janet
Mathie, Bessie Weir, and Marjory Craig did obstinately deny. One
remarkable passage there was concerning Janet Mathie. The justice
upon the 27th of January commanded the jailor to fix her feet in
the stocks, that she might not do violence to her own life. The man
declared, “That the next morning he had found her bolster, which the
night before was laid at least six yards distant from the stocks,
now placed beneath her; the stocks being so heavy, that two of the
strongest men in the country could hardly have carried them six
yards: He wondering, did ask her, How she had win to the bolster?”
she answered, “That she had crept alongst the floor of the room,
drawing the stocks to the same place.” And before the court, she
said, “She had gotten one foot free out of the hole, and with the
other had drawn the stocks;” a thing altogether impossible, the
stocks being so weighty, nor was she able to take her foot out of the
hole.

The justices having examined all witnesses in matters of fact,
touching the effigies, Sir George’s sickness, and the recovery of
his health, upon the finding of the same, considering also the bad
fame of those who were obstinate, and having confronted them with
the confessing witches, who in their faces avowed their accession,
in manner exprest in the confessions above written. Considering,
lastly, all other circumstances of their case, committed them to the
trial of a judicious inquest; who being found guilty, were condemned
to the fire to be burnt, and their effigies with them. Only Annabil,
in regard of her nonage, and the evidences she seemed to give of
her penitency, was reprieved by order of council, but to remain in
prison. In the mean time, both she and her brother John did seriously
exhort their mother to confession; and with tears, did Annabil put
her in mind of the many meetings she had with the devil in her own
house; and that a summer’s day would not be sufficient to relate
what she had seen pass between the devil and her; but nothing could
prevail with her obdured and hardened heart.

It is to be noted, the dumb girl, whose name was Janet Douglas, doth
now speak, not very distinctly, yet so as she may be understood; and
is a person that most wonderfully discovers things past, and doth
also understand the Latin tongue, which she never learned.


II.—_Being a Wonderful discovery of Murder by an Apparition._

About the year of our Lord 1632, near unto Chester in the street,
there lived one Walker, a yeoman of good estate, and a widower, who
had a young woman called Anna Walker to his kinswoman, that kept his
house, who was by the neighbours suspected to be with child; and was,
towards the dark of the evening, one night sent away with Mark Sharp,
who was a collier, or one that digged coals under ground, and who
had been born in Blackburn-hundred in Lancashire, and so she was not
heard of for a long time, and no noise or little was made about her.
In the winter time, one James Graham, being a miller, and living two
miles from the place where Walker lived, was one night alone very
late in the mill grinding corn; and about twelve or one o’clock at
night he came down the stairs, from having been putting corn in the
hopper, the mill-doors being shut, there stood a woman upon the midst
of the floor, with her hair about her head, hanging down and all
bloody, with five large wounds on her head. He being much affrighted
and amazed, began to bless himself; and at last asked her who she
was, and what she wanted? To whom she answered, “I am the spirit of
such a woman, who lived with Walker; and being got with child by
him, he promised to send me to a private place, where I should be
well look’d to, until I was brought to bed, and well recovered, and
then I should come home again, and keep his house. And accordingly,”
said the apparition, “I was one night late, sent away with one Mark
Sharp, who upon a muir (naming a plain which the miller knew) slew
me with a pick, such as men dig coals withal, and gave me these five
wounds, and after threw my body into a coal pit hard by, and hid
the pick under a bank; and his shoes and stockings being bloody, he
endeavoured to wash them, but seeing the blood would not wash out,
he hid them there.” And the apparition further told the miller,
“That he must be the man to reveal it, or else that she must still
appear and haunt him.” The miller returned home, very sad and heavy,
and spoke not one word of what he had seen, but shunned as much as
he could to stay in the mill after night without company, thinking
thereby to escape the seeing again that frightful apparition. But
notwithstanding, one night when it began to be dark, the apparition
met him again, and seemed very fierce and cruel; and threatened
him, that if he did not reveal the murder, she would continually
pursue and haunt him: Yet for all this, he concealed it, until some
few nights before Christmas; when being, soon after sunset, walking
in his garden, she appeared again, and then so threatened him, and
affrighted him, that he faithfully promised to reveal in the next
morning.

In the morning he went to a magistrate, and made the whole matter
known, with all the circumstances: And diligent search being made,
the body was found in a coal pit, with five wounds in the head, and
the pick, and shoes and stockings yet bloody, in every circumstance
as the apparition had related to the miller. Whereupon Walker and
Sharp were both apprehended, but would confess nothing. At the
assize following, viz. at Durham, they were arraigned, found guilty,
condemned, and executed; but would never confess the fact. There are
many persons yet alive that can remember this strange murder; and the
discovery of it; for it was, and sometimes yet is, as much discoursed
of in the North of England as any thing that almost hath ever been
heard of, and the relation was printed, though now not to be gotten.


III.—_Touching the Witchcraft of Agnes Simpson._

Though this be of too old a date to comply with the title of our
stories, yet being a true copy of record, as authentic, though not
so fresh, it may haply not be amiss briefly to name some effects,
kinds, and circumstances of her sorcery; as her skill in diseases;
that the sickness of William Black was an elf-shot; her taking the
sick parties pains and sicknesses upon herself for a time, and then
translating them to a third person; her usage of long scriptural
prayers and rhymes, containing the main points of Christianity, so
that she may seem to have been not so much a white witch, as an holy
woman; her using of such nonsensical rhymes for the instructing of
ignorant people, and teaching them to pray, as these two prayers,
the Black and White Pater Noster in metre, in set forms, to be used
morning and evening, and at other times, when occasion offereth.


_White Pater Noster._

    GOD was my foster,
    He fostered me
    Under the book of palm-tree.
    Saint Michael was my dame,
      He was born at Bethlehem.
    He was made of flesh and blood,
    God send me my right food;
    My right food, and dyne too,
    That I may to yon kirk go,
    To read upon yon sweet book,
    Which the mighty God of heaven shook.
    Open, open heaven’s yaits.
    Steik, steik hell’s yaits.
    All saints be the better,
    That hear the White Prayer, Pater Noster.


_The Black Pater Noster runs thus_:

      Four neuks in this house for haly angels,
    A post in the midst, that Christ Jesus,
    Lucas, Marcas, Matthew, Joannes,
    God be into this house, and all that belang us.

But when she sought for an answer from the devil upon any occasion,
he appeared to her in the shape of a dog. But the way of dismissing
and conjuring him to go was thus: I charge thee to depart on the law
thou lives on, as she did, when she dismissed him after consulting
him about the old Lady Edmiston’s sickness. But the manner how she
raised the devil was with these words: Elva, come and speak to
me;—who came in the likeness of a dog. Her sailing with her kimmers
and fellow witches in a boat to a ship, is very remarkable, where the
devil caused her and them to drink good wine and beer without money;
she neither seeing the mariners, nor the mariners her; and after all,
the devil raised a wind, whereby the ship perished. Her baptizing and
using other ceremonies upon a cat, with other witches, to hinder
Queen Anne from coming into Scotland. Her raising of a spirit to
conjure a picture of wax for destroying Mr. John Moscrope.

But to be more particular, I shall give you her own confession to
King James. Item, Failied and convict of so much, that the devil, in
man’s likeness, met her going out to the fields from her own house
at Keith, betwixt five and six at even, being alone, and commanded
her to be at North Berwick kirk the next night. To which place she
came on horseback, conveyed by her good-son, called John Couper,
and lighted at the kirk yard, or a little before she came to it,
about eleven hours at even. They danced along the kirk yard, Geilie
Duncan playing on a trump, and John Fein muzzled led the king; the
said Agnes and her daughter followed next. Besides, there were Kate
Gray, George Moilis’s wife, Robert Grierson, Katherine Duncan, Bessie
Wright, Isobel Gilmour, John Graymail, Duncan Buchanan, Thomas
Barnhill, and his wife, Gilbert Mackgill, John Mackgill, Katharine
Mackgill, with the rest of their kimmers, above an 100 persons,
whereof there were six men, and all the rest women. The women made
first their courtesy to their master, and then the men. The men
turning nine times widdershines’ about, and the women six times. John
Fein blew up the kirk-doors, and blew in the lights, which were like
meikle black candles sticking round about the pulpit.

The devil started up himself in the pulpit like a meikle black man;
and calling the row, every one answered, Here. Mr. Rob. Grierson
being named, they all ran hirdie girdie, and were angry, for it was
promised he should be called Robert the Comptroller, _alias_ Robert
the Rower, for expriming of his name.

The first thing he demanded was, If they all kept promise, and had
been good servants, and what they had done since the last time they
had convened. At his command, they opened up three graves, two
within, and one out of the kirk, and cutted off from the dead corpses
the joints of their fingers, toes, and nose, and parted them amongst
them; and the said Agnes Simpson got, for her part, a winding-sheet
and two joints. The devil commanded them to keep the joints upon them
till they were dry, and then to make a powder of them, to do evil
withal. Then he commanded them to keep his commandments, which were
to do all the evil and mischief they could. Before they departed, and
were dismist, they behoved to kiss his arse, (with reverence to the
reader.) He had on him a gown and a coat, which were both black. And
they that were assembled, part stood and part sat. John Fein was ever
nearest the devil, at his left elbock. Graymail keeped the door.

That which is observable in John Fein is, that the devil appeared to
him, not in the black, but in white raiment; but proposed as hellish
a covenant to him as those fiends to appear in black. His skimming in
the sea in a boat, is remarkable, with those of his accomplices: and
his fortelling the leak in the Queen’s ship by the help of the devil.
His raising winds with the rest, when the king sailed into Denmark,
by casting a cat into the sea, which the devil delivered to them, and
taught them to cry, Hola, when they first cast it in. His raising a
mist at the king’s return from Denmark, by getting Satan to cast a
thing like a foot ball (it appearing to John like a wisp) into the
sea, which made a reek to arise, whereby the king’s majesty might
be cast upon the coast of England. His opening of locks by sorcery,
by mere blowing into a woman’s hand, while he sat by the fire. His
embarking in a boat with other witches, and all of them sailing over
sea, and entering within a ship, and drinking good wine and ale
there, and sinking the ship when they had done, with the persons
in it. His kissing Satan’s arse (with reverence) again at another
conventical. His being swiftly carried above in the air, in chasing
of a cat, to catch her to cast into the sea, thereby to raise winds,
according to the prescription of Satan. His pretending to tell any
man how long he should live, if he told him but the day of his birth.




IV.—_A Proclamation over the Market Cross of Edinburgh, at twelve
o’clock at night._


After that king James IV. had mustered his army in the Burrow-muir,
being at that time a large spacious field, and most pleasant and
delightful, by reason of many stately oaks which overshadowed the
place; about midnight, in the month of July, there was a proclamation
heard at the market-cross of the town, summoning a great many
burgesses, gentlemen, barons, and noblemen, to appear before the
tribunal of one Plotcock.

The provost of the town, standing in his own fore-stair, or gallery,
having heard his own name cited, cried out, “That he declined that
judicatory, and appealed to the mercy of God.” This was the army
which the king led into England, and were defeat at Flodden, on the
fatal day, Tuesday the 9th of September 1513, where the King, with
near about five thousand of the noblest and worthiest families of the
kingdom, did fall.




V.—_A miraculous Cure of a Dutch Woman, accompanied with an
Apparition._


The narrative taken by a Dutch merchant from her own mouth, begins
thus:—A miraculous cure upon Jesch Claes, a woman about fifty years
of age, for these many years well known to myself and the neighbours.
This woman for fourteen years had been lame of both her legs, one of
them being dead and without feeling, so that she could not go, but
creep upon the ground, or was carried in people’s arms as a child,
but now through the power of God Almighty she hath walked again,
which came to pass after this manner, as I have written it from her
own mouth.

In the year 1676, about the 13th or 14th of this month of October,
in the night, between one and two o’clock, Jesch Claes being in bed
with her husband, who was a boatman, she was three times pulled by
the arm, with which she awaked, and cried out, O Lord! what may this
be? Hereupon she heard an answer in plain words, “Be not afraid, I
am come in the name of God, to tell you, that your malady, which
hath been for many years upon you, shall depart, and it shall be
given you from God Almighty to walk again. But keep this to yourself
till further answer.” Whereupon she cried aloud, O Lord! that I had
a light that I might know what this is. Then had she this answer,
“There needs no light. Light shall be given you from God.” Then
came a light over all the room; and she saw a beautiful youth about
ten years of age, with curled yellow hair, in white raiment to
the feet, who went from the bed-head to the chimney with a light,
which a little after evanished. Hereupon did something gush from
her hip, or diffuse itself through her leg as a water, to her great
toe, where she found life rising up; and feeling it with her hand,
she cries out, “Lord give me now again my feeling, which I have not
had for so many years.” And she continued crying and praying to the
Lord according to her weak measure. Yet she continued that day being
Wednesday, and the next day Thursday, as before, till evening at six
o’clock; at which time she sat at the fire, dressing the food. Then
there came, as a rushing noise in both her ears, with which it was
said to her, “Stand, your walking is given you again.” Then did she
immediately stand up, that had for so many years crept, and went to
the door: her husband meeting her, was exceedingly afraid, and drew
back. In the mean while she cried out, “My dear husband, I can walk
again.” The man, thinking it was a spirit, drew back, saying, “You
are not my wife;” but his wife taking hold of him, said, “My dear
husband, I am the self-same that hath been married these thirty years
to you. The Almighty God hath made me to walk again.” But her husband
being amazed, drew back to the side of the room, till at last she
claspt her arms about his neck; and yet he doubted, and said to his
daughter, “Is this your mother?” She answered, “Yes, father, this is
my mother indeed, I have seen her walk also, before you came in.”
This person dwells upon Prince’s Island in Amsterdam. This relation
is attested by many famous witnesses.




VI.—_Strange pranks played by the Devil at Woodstock in England, anno
1649._


The commissioners, October 13, 1649, with their servants, being come
to the manor-house, they took up their lodging in the king’s own
rooms, the bed-chamber, and withdrawing room: the former whereof
they also made their kitchen; the council-hall their brew-house; the
chamber of presence, their place of sitting to dispatch business;
and a wood-house of the dining-room, where they laid the wood of
that ancient standard in the High Park, known of all by the name of
the King’s Oak, which (that nothing might remain that had the name
of King affixed to it) they digged up by the roots. October 14th
and 15th, they had little disturbance; but on the 16th there came,
as they thought, somewhat into the bed-chamber, where two of the
commissioners and their servants lay, in the shape of a dog, which
going under their beds, did, as it were, gnaw their bed cords; but on
the morrow finding them whole, and a quarter of beef, which lay on
the ground untouched, they began to entertain other thoughts.

October 17. Something, to their thinking, removed all the wood of
the King’s Oak, out of the dining-room to the presence-chamber, and
hurled the chairs and stools up and down that room: From whence it
came into the two chambers where the commissioners and their servants
lay, and hoisted up the feet of their beds so much higher than their
heads, that they thought they should have been turned over and over,
and then let them fall down with such force, that their bodies
rebounded from the bed a good distance, and then shook the bedsteads
so violently, that themselves confest their bodies were sore with it.

October 18. Something came into the bed-chamber, and walked up and
down, and fetching the warming-pan out of the withdrawing-room, made
so much noise, that they thought five bells could not have made more.
And October 19th, Trenchers were thrown up and down the dining-room,
and at them who lodged there; one of them being wakened, put forth
his head to see what was the matter, but had trenchers thrown at it.

October 20th. The curtains of the bed in the withdrawing-room were
drawn to and fro, and the bed-stead much shaken, and eight great
pewter dishes, and three dozen of trenchers, thrown about the
bed-chamber again. This night they also thought a whole armful of the
wood of the King’s Oak were thrown down in their chambers, but of
that in the morning they found nothing had been moved.

October 21st. The keeper of their ordinary, and his bitch lay in one
of the rooms with them, which night they were not disturbed at all.
But Oct. 22d, Though the bitch kennelled there again, to whom they
ascribed their former night’s rest, both they and the bitch were in a
pitiful taking, the bitch opening but once, and that with a whining
fearful yelp.

October 23. They had all their clothes pluck’d off them in the
withdrawing room, and the bricks fell out of the chimney into the
room.

On the 24th, They thought in the dining-room, that all the wood of
the King’s Oak had been brought thither, and thrown down close by
their bed-side; which being heard by those of the withdrawing-room,
one of them rose to see what was done, fearing indeed that his
fellow commissioners had been killed, but found no such matter.
Whereupon returning to his bed again, he found two or three dozen of
trenchers thrown into it, and handsomely covered with the bed clothes.

October 25. The curtains of the bed in the withdrawing-room were
drawn to and fro, and the bed-stead shaken as before; and in the
bed-chamber, glass flew about so thick (and yet not one lozen of
the chamber windows broken) that they thought it had rained money,
whereupon they lighted candles; but, to their grief, they found
nothing but glass.

October 29. Something going to the window opened and shut it; then
going into the bed-chamber, it threw great stones, for half an
hour’s time, some whereof lighted on the high-bed, others on the
truckle-bed, to the number in all of above fourscore. This night
there was also a very great noise, as if forty pieces of ordnance
had been shot off together. At two several knocks, it astonished all
the neighbouring dwellers, which is thought might have been heard a
great way off. During these noises, which were heard in both rooms
together, both commissioners and their servants were struck with so
great horror, that they cried out one to another for help: whereon
one of them recovering himself out of a strange agony he had been in,
snatched a sword, and had like to have killed one of his brethren
coming out of his bed in his shirt, whom he took for the spirit that
did the mischief. However, at length they got all together, yet the
noise continued so great and terrible, and shook the walls so much,
that they thought the whole manor would have fallen on their heads.
At its departure, it took all the glass of the windows away with it.

November 1. Something, as they thought, walked up and down the
withdrawing-room, and then made a noise in the dining-room. The
stones which were left before, and laid up in the withdrawing, room
were all fetched away this night, and a great deal of glass (not like
the former) thrown about again.

November 2. There came something into the withdrawing-room, treading
as they conceived, much like a bear, which first only walked about a
quarter of an hour; at length it made a noise about the table, and
threw the warming pan so violently, that it quite spoiled it. It
threw also a glass and great stones at them again, and the bones of
horses; and all so violently, that the bed-stead and the walls were
bruised by them. That night they planted candles all about the rooms,
and made fires up to the rantletrees of the chimneys, but were all
put out, no body knew how, the fire and burn-wood, which made it,
being thrown up and down the rooms; the curtains torn with the rods
from their beds, and the bed-posts pulled away, that the tester fell
down upon them, and the feet of the bed-stead cloven into two. And
upon the servants in the truckle-bed, who lay all the time sweating
for fear, there was first a little, which made them begin to stir,
but before they could get out, there came a whole tub-full, as it
were, of stinking ditch water down upon them, so green, that it made
their shirts and sheets of that colour too.

The same night the windows were all broken by throwing of stones, and
there was most terrible noises in three several places together, to
the extraordinary wonder of all that lodged near them. Nay, the very
rabbit-stealers, who were abroad that night, were so affrighted with
the dismal thundering, that for haste they left their ferrets in the
holes behind them, beyond Rosamond’s well. Notwithstanding of all
this, one of them had the boldness to ask, “In the name of God what
it was that it would have, and what they had done, that they should
be so disturbed after this manner?” To which no answer was given,
but it ceased for a while. At length it came again, and, as all of
them said, brought seven devils worse than itself. Whereupon one of
them lighted a candle again, and set it between the two chambers in
the door-way, on which another fixing his eyes, saw the similitude
of a hoof striking the candle and candlestick into the middle of the
bed-chamber, and afterwards making three scrapes on the snuff to put
it out. Upon this, the same person was so bold as to draw his sword,
but he had scarce got it out, when there was another invisible hand
had hold of it too, and tugged with him for it; and, prevailing,
struck him so violently, that he was stunned with the blow.

Then began violent noises again, insomuch that they called to one
another, got together, and went into the presence-chamber, where
they said prayers, and sung psalms: notwithstanding all which, the
thundering noise still continued in other rooms. After this, November
3d, they removed their lodging over the gate; and next day, being
Sunday, went to Ewelm, where how they escaped, the authors of the
relation knew not. But returning on Monday, the devil (for that was
the name they gave their nightly guest) left them not unvisited, nor
on the Tuesday following, which was the last day they stayed.




VII.—_An Apparition to King James the IV. and his Courtiers, in the
kirk of Linlithgow._


While the king stayed at Linlithgow, attending the gathering of his
army, which was defeat at Floudon, being full of care and perplexity,
he went into the church of St. Michael, to hear evening song, as
then it was called. While he was at his devotion, an ancient man
came in, his amber coloured hair hanging down about his shoulders,
his forehead high, and inclining to baldness, his garments of azure
colour, somewhat long, girded about with a towel, or table napkin,
of a comely and very reverent aspect. Having enquired for the king,
he intruded himself into the press, passing through till he came
to him, with a clownish simplicity, leaning over the canon’s seat,
where the king sat, “Sir (said he) I am sent hither to entreat you
to delay your expedition for this time, and proceed no farther in
your intended journey; for if you do, you shall not prosper in your
enterprise, nor any of your followers. I am further charged to warn
you, not to use the acquaintance, company, or counsel of woman, as
you tender your honour, life, and estate.” After this warning, he
withdrew himself back again into the press. When service was ended,
the King enquired earnestly for him, but he could be no where found,
neither could any of the bystanders (of whom divers did narrowly
observe him, resolving afterwards to have discoursed with him) feel
or perceive how, when, or where he passed from them, having in a
manner vanished in their hands.




VIII.—_Anent the Major who returned from death to tell the Captain
whether there was a GOD or not._


Concerning the apparition of the Ghost of Major Geo. Sydenham (late
of Dulverton, in the county of Somerset) to Captain William Dyke,
(late of Skilgate in this county also, and now likewise deceased)
be pleased to take the relation of it from a worthy and learned
gentleman, Dr. Thomas Dyke, a near kinsman of the captain’s, thus:
Shortly after the major’s death, the doctor was desired to come
to the house to take care of a child that was sick there; and in
his way thither he called on the captain, who was very willing to
wait on him to the place, because he must, as he said, have gone
thither that night, though he had not met with so encouraging, an
opportunity. After their arrival there at the house, and the civility
of the people shewn them in that entertainment, they were seasonably
conducted to their lodging, which they desired might be together
in the same bed; where, after they had lain a while, the captain
knock’d, and bid the servants bring him two of the largest and
highest candles lighted he could get; whereupon the doctor enquires
what he meant by this? The captain answers, “You know, cousin, what
disputes my major and I have had touching the being of God, and the
immortality of the soul; in which points, we could never yet be
resolved, though we so much sought for and desired it. And therefore
it was at length fully agreed between us, that he who of us died
first, should, the third night after his funeral, between the hours
of twelve and one, come to the little house which is here in the
garden, and there give a full account to the survivor, touching
these matters, who should be sure to be present there at the set
time, and to receive a full satisfaction. And this (says the captain)
is the very night, and I am come on purpose to fulfil my promise.”
The doctor dissuaded him, minding of the danger of following strange
counsels, for which he could have no warrant; and that the devil
might, by some cunning device, take such an advantage of this rash
attempt, as might work his utter ruin. The captain replies, “That he
had solemnly engaged, and that nothing should discourage him;” and
adds, “That if the doctor would wake a while with him, he would thank
him, if not, he might compose himself to rest; but for his own part,
he was resolved to watch, that he might be sure to be present at the
hour appointed.” To that purpose he sets his watch by him, and as
soon as he perceived by it that it was half past eleven, he rises,
and, taking a candle in each hand, goes out by a back door, of which
he had before gotten the key, and walks into the garden-house, where
he continued two hours and a half, and at his return, declared that
he neither saw nor heard any thing more than what was usual. But I
know, said he, that my major would surely have come had he been able.

About six weeks after, the captain rides to Eaton, to place his son
a scholar there, when the doctor went thither with him. They lodged
there at an inn, the sign whereof was Christopher, and tarried two
or three nights, not lying together now as before at Dulverton, but
in two several chambers. The morning before they went thence, the
captain stayed in his chamber longer than he was wont to do, before
he called upon the doctor. At length he comes into the doctor’s
chamber, but in a visage and form much differing from himself,
with his hair and eyes staring, and his whole body shaking and
trembling. Whereat the doctor wondering, presently demanded, “What
is the matter, cousin captain?” The captain replies, “I have seen my
major.” At which the doctor seeming to smile, the captain confirms
it, saying, “If ever I saw him in my life, I saw him but now.” And
then related to the doctor what had passed thus: “This morning after
it was light, some one comes to my bed side, and suddenly drawing
back the curtains, calls, Captain, captain, (which was the term of
familiarity that the major used to call the captain by;) to whom I
replied, What, my major?” To which he returns, “I could not come at
the time appointed, but I am now come to tell you, That there is a
God, and a very just and terrible one; and if you do not turn o’er a
new leaf (the very expression, as the doctor punctually remembered,)
you shall find it so.” The captain proceeded: “On the table by there
lay a sword, which the major had formerly given me. Now, after the
apparition had walked a turn or two about the chamber, he took up the
sword, drew it, and finding it not so clean and bright as it ought,
“Captain, captain,” (says he) this sword did not use to be kept
after this manner when it was mine.” After which words he presently
disappeared.

The captain was not only thoroughly persuaded of what he had thus
seen and heard, but was from the time observed to be very much
affected with it. And the humour, which before in him was brisk and
jovial, was then strangely altered; in so much as very little meat
would pass down with him at dinner, though at the taking leave of
friends, there was a very handsome treat provided. Yea, it was
observed, that what the captain had thus seen and heard, had a more
lasting influence upon him; and it was judged by those who were
well acquainted with his conversation, that the remembrance of this
passage stuck close to him; and that those words of his dead friend
were frequently sounding fresh in his ears, during the remainder of
his life, which was about two years.




IX.—_A remarkable story of discovered witchcraft at Lauder_, anno
1649. _And of the wiles which the devil used in deceiving poor
creatures._


In the beginning of the year 1649, a common report passing up and
down in all men and women’s mouths, of an eminent warlock, whose
name was Robert Grieve, _alias_ Hob Grieve, trafficking in these
parts of the country, and deceiving many simple people. He was at
last discovered, apprehended, and imprisoned at the town of Lauder:
and after long shifting and denial, wherein he had learned of his
hellish master to be most subtile, by the great goodness of God he
was at length brought to a serious acknowledgement of his guilt,
and confession of his being the devil’s officer in that country,
for warning all Satan’s vassals to come to the meetings where, and
whensoever, the devil required, for the space of eighteen years and
more. He acknowledged also, That his wife (who twenty years, or
thereabout, before, was burnt at Lauder,) was the occasion of his
coming into that snare; for they being poor, and having little or
nothing to live upon, he began to grudge under that condition, and
to complain of his lot; which his wife perceiving, desired him not
to be troubled, but shewed him, that if he would follow her counsel,
she should acquaint him with a gentleman who would teach him a way
how to become rich. To which motion he hearkened, and at her desire
went down with her to a haugh on Galawater, near to the Stow, where
she trysted the gentleman; and when they had come to that place,
and tarried a considerable space, seeing nobody, he began to weary,
and told her, that he would be gone; but she pressing him to stay,
and assuring him that the gentleman would not fail her. At length
their came a great mastiff bigger than any butcher’s dog, and very
black, running upon him, which put him into such a confusion, and
astonishment of spirit, as that he knew not where he was; but his
wife laboured to comfort him under that consternation, assuring him,
that the gentleman would come presently and perform what she had
promised him.

And accordingly, in a short space, the devil appeared in the shape
of a Black Man, and fitting his discourse to the man’s temptation,
made many promises to him, That if he would become his servant and
obey him, he would teach him ways how to be made much of in all
the country; unto which demand of the devil he acknowledged, that
he consented, not so much for any hopes for future riches, as for
fear lest he should instantly be devoured by him, (for he suspected
in the very mean time it was the devil) and then he gave him that
charge to be his officer to warn all to the meetings, (as was said
before) in which charge he continued for the space of eighteen years
and more, until he was apprehended. He was most ingenuous in his
confession. An evidence whereof was this, “That there was neither man
nor woman delated by him, but were all confessors when apprehended,
and confronted with him, and died confessing. One instance whereof
is remarkable, and worthy of observation, which is this—After he
had delated many, and as many of those were apprehended as the
prison could conveniently contain, and the keepers attend, he gave
up another woman in the town of Lauder, whose name the magistrates
resolved to conceal for a time, till the prison should be emptied
of some of those who were already apprehended, and had confessed;
and accordingly secrecy was engaged unto. But the devil came that
same night unto her, and told her, “That Hob Grieve had blamed her
for a witch; but assured her, that if she would rise up and go and
challenge him for it, and never come away till he and she were
confronted, that then he would deny it. Whereupon she arose and
came to the prison window, and railed upon Hob Grieve, calling him
warlock, and slave to the devil, and all evils which her mouth could
utter; and when desired to get home by the centinels, and also by
the magistrates, she sat down upon the tolbooth stair, and said,
“She could never go to her house till she and that slave of the
devil were confronted. Whereupon the bailie came to the preacher,
desiring him to come and speak to her, to desire her to go home, for
there was none accusing her, who accordingly came, and entreated
her to go home; but she obstinately refusing to go, till she should
be confronted with that rascal, who had declared her, an honest
woman, for a witch. The bailie was constrained to grant her desire.
Whereupon many being present as witnesses, she was conveyed up to
prison, to the room where Hob Grieve was. And as soon as she was come
in sight, she fell down upon her knees, and began to scold the man,
and accuse him of a lie, in speaking of her name. Says she, “Thou
common thief, how dare thou for thy soul say, that ever before this
time, thou saw me or I saw thee, or ever was in thy company, either
alone, or with others.” All which language he heard very patiently,
till he was desired by the bailie to speak. Whereupon he asked her,
How she came to know, that he had delated her for a witch? For (says
he) surely none but the devil, thy old master, and mine, has told
thee so much. She replied, “The devil and thou perish together, for
he is not my master, though he be thine; I defy the devil and all his
works.” Whereupon he says to her, “What needs all this din? Dost thou
not know, these many years I have come to thy house, and warned thee
to meetings, and thou and I have gone along together?” And thereafter
he condescended to her upon several places, and actions done in these
places by her and others; “to all which, I am, (said he) a witness.”
By this she was so confounded, that immediately, in the presence of
the bailie, the preacher, the schoolmaster, and many witnesses, she
cried out, “Oh now (says she) I perceive that the devil is a liar, a
murderer from the beginning; for this night he came to me, and bid me
come and abuse thee; and he assured me, thou would deny all, and say,
thou false tongue thou lied. And she with many tears confessed, that
it was all truth which he had said, and prayed the minister, that he
would entreat God for her poor soul, that she might be delivered out
of the hands of the devil. Under this confession she continued even
unto the day of her death.

Another evidence of ingenuity in him was this: That after five or
six men and women whom he had delated, were also convinced and had
confessed their witchcraft, he earnestly desired, “That he and they
might be taken to the church on the Lord’s day, to hear the word of
God;” which being granted, and they conveyed with a guard to the
church, all of them sat down before the pulpit. The preacher lectured
on these words, Mark ix. 21. “And oft-time it hath cast him into
the fire, and into the water to destroy him,” &c. The father of the
lunatic child complained to Christ of the devil’s cruelty towards his
son. And the preacher briefly noted this observation from the words,
“That whatever the devil did to such as he had gotten any power over,
his aim and end was always to destroy the poor creature both soul
and body.” This truth being seriously applied, and spoken home by
the preacher to the said Hob Grieve, and the rest of the confessing
Witches and Warlocks, they were all immediately so confounded, that
all of them cried out with a lamentable noise, “Alas I that is a
most sure truth; Oh, what will become of us, poor wretches! Oh, pray
for us.” But Hob Grieve especially bare witness to that sad truth,
by a general declaration, in the face of the congregation, he had
experience of the truth, thereof. “For (said he) there is no trusting
to his promises; for in Musselburgh-water, when I had a heavy creel
upon my back, he thought to have drowned me there; and since I came
into prison, he did cast me into the fire to destroy me, as is well
known to the preacher and magistrates of the place and many others;
and concluded with an exhortation to all to beware of the devil.
“For whatever he saith or doth, his purpose is to destroy you, and
that you will find to be the end of his work, as we know to our
doleful experience this day.” Another evidence of the devil’s art
in studying the destruction of the poor creature, was manifest,
in that same place, and year 1649. A certain woman in the town of
Lauder was blamed, not by Hob Grieve, but by some other, and for a
long time denied. The magistrates of the place, for this cause, were
loth to meddle with her, but adjudged to death all the rest, who had
confessed; and ordained them to be burnt upon the Monday after; she
hearing of this, and she alone was to remain in prison, without hopes
of escape, was prompted by the devil to make up a confession in her
own bosom, as she supposed might take away her life; and thereupon
sent for the minister, and made that confession of witchcraft which
she herself had patched up, before witnesses; and in the close, she
earnestly entreated the magistrates and ministers, “That she might
be burnt with the rest upon Monday next.” Her confession was, “That
she had covenanted with the devil, and had become his servant about
twenty years before, when she was but a young lass: and that he
kissed her, and gave her a name, but since he had never owned her;
and that she knew no more of the works of the devil, as she should
answer to God, but what she had said was true.” But intelligent
persons began to be jealous of the truth of that confession, and
began to suspect, That out of the pride of her heart, in a desperate
way, she had made up that confession to destroy her life, because she
still pressed to be cut off with the rest on Monday. Therefore much
pains was taken on her by ministers and others on Saturday, Sunday,
and Monday morning, that she might resile from that confession, which
was suspected to be but a temptation of the devil to destroy both her
soul and body; yea it was charged home upon her by the ministers,
that there was just ground of jealousy, that her confession was not
sincere, and she was charged before the Lord to declare the truth,
and not take her blood upon her own head. Yet stiffly she adhered to
what she had said, and cried always to be put away with the rest.
Whereupon, on Monday morning, being called before the judges, and
confessing before them what she said, she was found guilty, and
condemned to die with the rest that same day. Being carried forth
to the place of execution, she remained silent, during the first,
second, and third prayer, and then perceiving that there remained
no more, but to rise and go to the stake, she lifted up her body,
and with a loud voice, cried out, “Now all you that see me this day,
know that I am now to die a witch by my own confession, and I free
all men, especially the ministers and magistrates, of the guilt of
my blood. I take it wholly upon myself, my blood be upon my own
head. And as I must make answer to the God of heaven presently, I
declare, I am as free of witchcraft as any child; but being delated
by a malicious woman, and put in prison under the name of a witch,
disowned by my husband and friends, and seeing no ground of hope of
my coming out of prison, or ever coming in credit again, through
the temptation of the devil I made up that confession, on purpose
to destroy my own life, being weary of it, and chusing rather to
die than live; and so died.” Which lamentable story, as it did then
astonish all the spectators, none of which could restrain themselves
from tears, so it may be to all a demonstration of Satan’s subtilty,
whose design is still to destroy all, partly by tempting many to
presumption, and some others to dispair. These things are attested
to be true by an eye and ear-witness, who is yet alive, a faithful
minister of the gospel.




X.—_A true narrative of the Drummer of Tedworth._


In the year 1661, about the middle of March, a gentleman named Mr.
Mompesson, in the county of Wilts, being at a neighbouring town,
called Ludgarshal, and hearing a drum beat there, he enquired of
the bailie of the town, at whose house he then was, what it meant.
The bailie told him, That they had been for some days troubled with
an idle drummer, who demanded money of the constable, by virtue of
a pretended pass, which he thought was counterfeit. Upon this Mr.
Mompesson sent for the fellow, and asked him by what authority he
went up and down the country with his drum? The drummer answered,
He had good authority, and produced his pass, with a warrant under
the hands of Sir William Cowley, and Col. Ayliff of Creetenham. Mr.
Mompesson knowing these gentlemen’s hands, discovered that the pass
and warrant were counterfeit, and thereupon commanded the vagrant to
put off his drum, and charged the constable to carry him before the
next justice of the peace to be further examined, and punished. The
fellow confessed the cheat, and begged only to have his drum. Mr.
Mompesson told him, That if he understood from Colonel Ayliff, whose
drummer he said he was, that he had been an honest man, he should
have it again; but in the mean time he would secure it. So he left
the drum with the bailie, and the drummer in the constable’s hands,
who, it seems, was prevailed on by the fellow’s intreaties to let
him go.——About the midst of April following, when Mr. Mompesson was
preparing for a journey to London, the bailie sent the drum to his
house. When he returned from that journey, his wife told him that
they had been much affrighted in the night by thieves, and that the
house had been like to have been broken up; and he had not been at
home above three nights, when the same noise was heard, that had
disturbed his family in his absence. It was a very great din and
knocking at his doors, and the outside of his house. Hereupon he got
up, and went about the house with a brace of pistols in his hands. He
opened the door where the great knocking was, and then he heard the
noise at another door. He opened that also, and went out round his
house, but could discover nothing, only he heard a strange noise, as
a thumping and drumming on the top of his house, which continued a
great space, and then by degrees went off into the air. After this
the noise of thumping and drumming was very frequent, usually five
nights together, and then it would intermit three. It was on the out
sides of the house, which is most of it of board. It came constantly
as they were going to sleep, whether early or late. After a month’s
disturbance without, it came into the room where the drum lay, four
or five nights in seven, within half an hour after they were in bed,
continuing almost two hours. The sign of it just before it came
was, they still heard an hurling in the air over the house; and at
its going off the beating of a drum, like that at the breaking up
of a guard. It continued in the room for the space of two months,
which time Mr. Mompesson lay there to observe it. In the fore-part
of the night, it used to be very troublesome, but after two hours
all would be quiet.——Mrs. Mompesson being brought to bed, there was
but little noise that night she was in travel, nor any for three
weeks after, till she had recovered strength. But after this civil
cessation it returned in a ruder manner than before, and followed
and vext the youngest children, beating their bedsteads with that
violence, that all present expected when they would fall in pieces.
In laying hands on them, one should feel no blows, but might perceive
them to shake exceedingly. For an hour together it would beat on
the drum, roundheads and cuckolds, and tat-too, and several other
points of war, as well as any drummer could. After this they would
hear a scraping under the children’s bed, as by something that had
iron talons. It would lift the children up in their beds, follow them
from one room to another, and for a while haunt none particularly but
them. There was a cock-loft in the house, which had not been observed
to have been troubled, thither they removed the children, putting
them to bed, while it was fair day, where they were no sooner laid,
but their troubler was with them as before.—On the 1st of November
1662, it kept a mighty noise; and a servant observing two boards in
the children’s room seeming to move, he bid it give him one of them;
upon which the board came (nothing moving it that he saw) within
a yard of him. The man added, “Nay, let me have it in my hand;”
upon which it was shut quite home to him; he thrust it back, and it
was driven to him again, and so up and down, to and fro, at least
twenty times together, till Mr. Mompesson forbad his servant’s such
familiarities. This was in the day time, and seen by a whole roomful
of people: that morning it left a sulphureous smell behind it, which
was very offensive. At night the minister, one Mr. Craig and divers
of the neighbours, came to the house on a visit. The minister went
to prayer with them, kneeling at the children’s bed-side; during
prayer-time, it withdrew into the cock-loft, but returned as soon
as prayer was ended; and then, in sight of the company, the chairs
walked about the room of themselves; the children’s shoes were hurled
over their head, and every loose thing moved about the chamber. At
the same time a bed-staff was thrown at the minister, which hit
him on the leg, but so favourably, that some wool could not have
fallen more softly; and it was observed, that it stopt just where it
lighted, without rolling or stirring from that place. Mr. Mompesson
perceiving that it so much persecuted the young children, he lodged
them out at a neighbour’s house, taking his eldest daughter, who was
about ten years of age, into his own chamber, where it had not been a
month before. As soon as she was in bed, the disturbance began there
again, continuing drumming and making noises; and it was observed,
that it would exactly answer in drumming any thing that was beaten
or called for. After this, the house where the children were lodging
in, happening to be full of strangers, they were taken home, and no
disturbance having been known in the parlour, they were lodged there,
where also their persecutor found them; but then only plucked them by
the hair and night clothes, without any other disturbance.

It was noted, that when the noise was loudest, no dog about the house
would move, though the knocking was oft so boisterous and rude, that
it had been heard a considerable distance in the fields, and awakened
the neighbours in the village, none of which live very near the
house. The servants sometimes were lift up with their beds, and then
let gently down again without hurt; at other times it would lie like
a great weight upon their feet.

About the latter end of December 1662, the drummings were less
frequent; and then they heard a noise like the gingling of money,
occasioned, as it was thought, by somewhat Mr. Mompesson’s mother
had spoke the day before to a neighbour, who talked of fairies
leaving money, viz. That she would like it well, if it would leave
some money to make amends for their trouble. The night after the
speaking of which, there was a great gingling of money over all
the house. After this, it desisted from ruder noises, and employed
itself in little apish, and less troublesome tricks. On Christmas
even, a little before day, one of the boys arising out of his bed,
was hit on a sore place on his heel, with the latch of the door; the
pin that it was fastened with, was so small that it was a difficult
matter to pick it out. The night after Christmas day, it threw the
old gentlewoman’s clothes about the room, and hid her bible among the
ashes. In such silly tricks it was frequent. After this it was very
troublesome to a servant of Mr. Mompesson’s, who was a stout fellow,
and of a sober conversation. This man lay within during the greatest
disturbance; and for several nights, something would endeavour to
pluck his clothes off the bed, so that he was lain to tug hard to
keep them on, and sometimes were plucked from him by force, and his
shoes thrown at his head. And now and then he should find himself
forcibly held, as if he were bound hand and foot; but whenever he
could make use of his sword, and struck with it, the spirit quitted
its hold. A little after these contests, a son of Sir Thomas Bennet,
whose workman the drummer had sometimes been, came to the house, and
told Mr. Mompesson some words that he had spoken, which it seems were
not well taken. For when they were in bed, the drum was beat up very
violently and loudly; the gentleman arose, and called his man to him,
who lay with Mr. Mompesson’s servant, just now spoken of, whose name
was John.——When Mr. Bennet’s man was gone, John heard a ruffing noise
in his chamber, and something came to his bed side, as if it had been
one in silk. The man presently reached after his sword, which he
found held from him; and it was with difficulty and much tugging that
he got it in his power: which as soon as he had done the spirit left
him; and it was always observed that it still avoided a sword. About
the beginning of Jan. 1663, they were wont to hear a singing in the
chimney, before it came down.——One night about this time, lights were
seen in the house. One of them came into Mr. Mompesson’s chamber,
which seemed blue and glimmering, and caused stiffness in the eyes
of those who saw it. After this something was heard coming up the
stair as it had been one without shoes. The light was seen four or
five times in the children’s chamber; and the maids confidently
affirm, the doors were at least ten times opened and shut in their
sight; and when they were opened they heard a noise as if half a
dozen had entered together. After which, some were heard to walk
about the room, and one ruffled as if it had been in silk. The like
Mr. Mompesson himself once heard.—During the time of the knocking,
when many were present, a gentleman of the company said, “Satan, if
the drummer set thee to work, give three knocks and no more;” which
it did very distinctly, and stopt. Then the gentleman knocked, to
see if it would answer him, as it was wont, but it did not. For
further trial, he bid it, for confirmation, “If it were the drummer,
to give five knocks and no more that night;” which it did, and left
the house quiet all that night. This was done in the presence of Sir
Thomas, Chamberlain of Oxfordshire, and divers others.——On Saturday
morning an hour before day, January 10, a drum was heard beat upon
the out sides of Mr. Mompesson’s chamber, from whence it went to the
other end of the house, where some gentlemen strangers lay, playing
at their door, and without, four or five several tunes, and so went
off into the air.——The next night, a smith in the village lying with
John the man, they heard a noise in the room as if one had been
shoeing of an horse; and somewhat came, as it were with a pair of
pinchers, snipping at the smith’s nose most part of the night.—One
morning, Mr. Mompesson rising early to go a journey, heard a great
noise below, where the children lay; and, running down with a pistol
in his hand, he heard a voice crying, A witch, a witch, as they had
also heard it once before; at his entrance all was quiet.—Having one
night played some little tricks at Mr. Mompesson’s bed-foot, it went
into another bed where one of his daughters lay; there it passed from
side to side, lifting her up as it passed under. At that time, there
were three kinds of noises in the bed. They endeavoured to thrust at
it with a sword, but it still shifted, and carefully avoided the
thrust, still getting under the child when they offered at it. The
night after, it came panting like a dog out of breath; upon which
one took a bed-staff to knock, which was caught out of her hand and
thrown away: and company coming up, the room was presently filled
with a bloomy noisome smell, and was very hot, though without fire,
in a very sharp severe winter night. It continued in the bed panting
and scratching an hour and a half, and then went into the next
chamber, where it knocked a little, and seemed to rattle a chain.
This it did for two or three nights together.

After all this, the old gentlewoman’s bible was found in the ashes,
the paper side being downwards. Mr. Mompesson took it up, and
observed that it lay open at the third chapter of Mark, where there
is mention of unclean spirits falling down before our Saviour, and
of his giving power to the twelve to cast out devils, and of the
scribes opinion that he cast them out through Beelzebub. The next
night they strewed ashes over the chamber to see what impressions it
would leave. In the morning they found in one place the resemblance
of a great claw, in another of a lesser, some letters in another,
which they could make nothing of, besides many circles in the
ashes.—About this time (says my author,) I went to the house, on
purpose to inquire the truth of those passages of which there was
so loud a report. It had ceased from its drumming and ruder noises
before I came hither: but most of the more remarkable circumstances
before related were confirmed to me by several of the neighbours
together, who had been present at them. At this time it used to
haunt the children as soon as they were laid. They went to bed that
night I was there about eight o’clock, when a maid servant coming
down, told us it was come. The neighbours that were there, and two
ministers, who had seen and heard it divers times, went away: but
Mr. Mompesson and I, and a gentleman that came with me, went up; I
heard a scratching, which was very strange, as I went up the stairs;
and when we came into the room, I perceived it was just behind the
bolster of the childrens’ bed, and seemed to be against the tyking.
It was as loud a scratching as one with long nails could make upon a
bolster. There were two little modest girls in the bed, between seven
and eleven years of age, as I guessed; I saw their hands without
the clothes, so that they could not contribute to the noise that
was behind their heads; they had been used to it, and had always
somebody or other in the chamber with them; and therefore seemed not
to be much affrighted; I, standing at the bed’s head, thrust my hand
behind the bolster, directing it to the place whence the noise seemed
to come; whereupon the noise ceased there, and was heard in another
part of the bed; but when I had taken out my hand, it returned and
was heard in the same place as before. I had been told that it would
imitate noises, and made trial, by scratching several times upon
the sheets, as five, seven, and ten, which it followed, and still
stopt at any number. I searched under and behind the bed, turned up
the clothes to the bed cords, grasped the bolster, sounded the wall
behind, and made all search that I possibly could, to find if there
were any trick, contrivance, or common cause of it; the like did my
friend, but we could discover nothing. So that I was then verily
persuaded, and am so still, that the noise was made by some dæmon
or spirit. After we had searched about half an hour or more, it went
into the midst of the bed, under the children, and there seemed to
pant like a dog out of breath very loudly: I put my hand upon the
place, and felt the bed bearing up against it, as if something within
had thrust it up; I grasped the feathers to feel if any living thing
were in them; I looked under, and every where about, to see if there
were any dog or cat, or any other creature in the room, and so we
all did, but found nothing. The motion it caused by this panting
was so strong, that it shook the room and windows very sensibly; it
continued this more than half an hour, while my friend and I staid
in the room, and as long after, as we were told. During the panting,
I chanced to see, as it were something (which I thought was a rat or
a mouse) moving in a linen bag that hung up against another bed that
was in the room; I stept and caught it up by the upper end with one
hand, with which I held it, and drew it quite through the other, but
found nothing at all in it. There was nobody near to shake the bag,
or if there had, no one could have made such motion, which seemed
to be from within, as if some living creature had moved in it. My
friend and I lay in the chamber where the first and chief disturbance
had been; we all slept well all night, but early before day in the
morning I was awakened (and I awakened my bedfellow) by a great
knocking just without our chamber door; I asked who was there several
times, but the knocking still continued without answer. At last I
said, “In the name of God, who is it, and what would you have?” to
which a voice answered, “Nothing with you.” We thinking it had been
some servant of the house, went to sleep again; but speaking of it
to Mr. Mompesson, when we came down, he assured us, “That no one of
the house lay that way, or had business thereabout, and that his
servants were not up till he called them, which was after it was
day.” Which they confirmed and protested, that the noise was not made
by them. Mr. Mompesson had told us before, “That it would be gone in
the middle of the night, and come again divers times early in the
morning about four o’clock;” and this I suppose was about that same
time. There came one morning a light into the children’s chamber,
and a voice crying “A witch, a witch,” for at least an hundred times
together. Mr. Mompesson at another time (being in the day) seeing
some wood move there, as of itself, discharged a pistol into it,
after which they found several drops of blood on the hearth, and
in divers places of the stair: for two or three nights after the
discharge of the pistol, there was a calm in the house; but then it
came again, applying itself to a little child, newly taken from the
nurse, which it so persecuted, that it would not let the poor infant
rest for two nights together, nor suffer a candle in the room, but
carry them away lighted up through the chimney, or cast them under
the bed. It so scared this child by leaping upon it, that for some
hours it could not be recovered out of the fright; so that they were
forced again to put the children out of the house. The next night
after, something about midnight came up the stairs, and knocked at
Mr. Mompesson’s door, but he lying still, it went up another pair
of stairs to his man’s chamber, to whom it appeared standing at his
bed foot. The exact shape and proportion he could not discover; but
he saith “He saw a great body, with two red glowring or glaring
eyes, which for some time were fixed steadily upon him, and at length
disappeared.” Another night, strangers being present, it purred in
the children’s bed like a cat; at which time the clothes and children
were lifted up from the bed, and six men could not keep them down.
Hereupon they removed the children, intending to have ripped the
bed; they were no sooner laid in another, but the second bed was
more troubled than the first; it continued thus four hours, and beat
the children’s legs against the bed-posts, that they were forced to
rise and sit up all night; after this it would empty chamber-pots
into their beds, and strew them with ashes from the hearth, though
they were never so carefully watched. It put a long picked iron in
Mr. Mompesson’s bed, and into his mother’s a naked knife upright. It
would fill porrengers with ashes, throw every thing about the room,
and make a noise all day.

About the beginning of April 1663, a gentleman that lay in the house,
had all his money turned black in his pocket. And Mr. Mompesson
coming one morning into his stable, found his horse he was wont to
ride on, lying on the ground, having one of his hinder legs in his
mouth, and so fastened, that it was difficult for several men to get
it out with a lever. After this there were some other remarkable
things, but my account goes no farther; only Mr. Mompesson wrote me
word, “That afterwards the house was several nights beset with seven
or eight, in the shape of men, who, as soon as a gun was discharged,
would shuffle away together into an arbour.”

The drummer was tried at the assize at Salisbury upon this occasion;
he was committed first to Gloucester gaol for stealing; and a
Wiltshire man coming to see him, he asked, What news in Wiltshire?
The man answered, “He knew of none.” “No,” saith the drummer, “did
you not hear of the drumming at a gentleman’s house at Tedworth?”
“That I do enough,” said the other. “Ay,” quoth the drummer, “I
have plagued him, and he shall never be quiet till he hath made me
satisfaction for taking away my drum.” Upon information of this,
the fellow was tried for a warlock at Sarum, and all the main
circumstances which I have related were sworn at the assizes by the
minister of the parish, and divers others of the most intelligent and
substantial inhabitants, who had been eye and ear witnesses of them,
time after time, for divers years together.—The fellow was condemned
for transportation, and accordingly sent away; but I know not how
(it is said by raising storms, and affrighting the seamen) he made
a shift to come back again. And it _is_ observable, That during all
the time of his restraint and absence, the house was quiet; but as
soon as ever he came back at liberty, the disturbance returned.—He
had been a soldier under Cromwell, and used to talk much of gallant
books, which he had of an odd fellow who was counted a wizzard. Upon
this occasion I shall here add a passage, which I had (saith my
author) from Mr. Mompesson, but yet relates to the main purpose.

The gentleman who was with me at the house, Mr. Hill, being in
company with one Compton of Somersetshire, practised physic, and
pretends to strange matters, related to him this story of Mr.
Mompesson’s disturbance. The physician told him, “He was sure it was
nothing but a rendezvous of witches, and that for an hundred pounds,
he would undertake to rid the house of all disturbance.” In pursuit
of this discourse he talked of many things; and having drawn my
friend into another room apart from the company, said, “He could make
him sensible he could do something more than ordinary,” and asked
him whom he desired to see? Mr. Hill had no great confidence in his
talk, whose wife was then many miles distant from them at her home.
Upon this Compton took up a looking-glass that was in the room, and
setting it down again, bid my friend look into it, which he did, and
there, as he most solemnly and seriously protested, he saw the exact
image of his wife, in that habit which she then wore, and working at
her needle in such a part of the room (there represented also) in
which, or about which time she really was, as he found upon enquiry
when he came to his own house.—The gentleman averred this to me,
and he is a very sober, intelligent, and creditable person. Compton
had no knowledge of him before, and was an utter stranger to the
person of his wife. Thus I have written the sum of Mr. Mompesson’s
disturbances, which (saith my author) I had partly from his own mouth
related before divers, who had been witnesses of all, and confirmed
his relation, and partly from his own letters, from which the order
and series of things is taken. The same particulars he wrote also to
Dr. Creed, then Doctor of the chair in Oxford.




XI.—_The Devil of Glenluce, enlarged with several remarkable
additions from an eye and ear witness, a person of undoubted
honesty._


This is that famous and notable story of the devil of Glenluce, which
I published in my Hydrostatics, anno 1672, and which since have been
transcribed word for word, by a learned pen, and published in a late
book intitled, Saducismus Triumphatus, whom nothing but the truth
thereof, and usefulness for refuting Atheism, could have persuaded
me to transcribe. The subject-matter, then, of this story, is a true
and short account of the troubles wherewith the family of one Gilbert
Campbell, by profession a weaver, in the old parish of Glenluce in
Galloway, was exercised. I have adventured to publish it _de novo_,
in this book, first, because it was huddled up among purposes of
another nature: but now I have reduced it to its own proper place.
Next, because this story is more full, being enlarged with new
additions, which were not in the former, and ends not so abruptly as
the other did.—It happened, says my informer, Gilbert Campbell’s son,
who was then a student of philosophy in the college of Glasgow, that
after one Alexander Agnew, a bold and sturdy beggar, who afterwards
was hanged at Dumfries for blasphemy, had threatened hurt to the
family, because he had not gotten such an alms as he required. The
said Gilbert Campbell was often hindered in the exercise of his
calling, and yet could not know by what means that was done. This
Agnew, amongst many blasphemous expressions, had this one when he
was interrogate by the judges, Whether or not he thought there was
a God? He answered “He knew no God but salt, meal, and water.” When
the stirs began, there was a whistling heard both within and without
the house. And Janet Campbell going one day to the well, to bring
home some water, was convoyed with a shrill whistling about her
ears, which made her say, “I would fain hear thee speak as well as
whistle.” Hereupon he said, after a threatening manner, “I’ll cast
thee, Janet, into the well.” The voice was most exactly like the
damsel’s voice, and did resemble it to the life. The gentlewoman that
heard this, and was a witness, thought the voice was very near to
her own ears, and said, “The whistling was such as children used to
make with their small slender glass whistles.”——About the middle of
November, the foul fiend came on with new and extraordinary assaults,
by throwing of stones in at the doors and windows, and down the
chimney-head, which were of great quantity, and thrown with force;
yet, by God’s providence, there was not one person in the family
that was hurt. This did necessitate Gilbert Campbell to reveal that
to the minister of the parish, and to other neighbours and friends,
which hitherto he had suffered secretly. Notwithstanding of this
his trouble was enlarged; for not long after, he found oftentimes
his warp and threads cut, as with a pair of scissars; and not only
so, but their apparel were cut after the same manner, even while
they were wearing them, their coats, bonnets, hose, shoes, but
could not discern how, or by what means. Only it pleased God to
preserve their persons, that the least harm was not done. Yet in
the night-time, they had not liberty to sleep, something coming and
pulling their bed-clothes, and linens off them, and leaving their
bodies naked. Next, their chests and trunks were opened, and all
things in them strawed here and there. Likewise the parts of their
working instruments which had escaped, were carried away, and hid
in holes and bores of the house, where hardly any could be found,
again. Nay, whatever piece of cloth or household stuff was in any
part of the house, it was carried away; and so cut and abused, that
the good man was necessitate, in all haste and speed, to remove, and
transport the rest to a neighbour’s house, and he himself compelled
to quit the exercise of his calling, whereby he only maintained his
family. Yet he resolved to remain in his house for a season; during
which time, some persons about, not very judicious, counselled him
to send his children out of the family, here and there, to try whom
the trouble did most follow, assuring him that his trouble was not
against the whole family, but against some person or other in it,
whom he too willingly obeyed. Yet, for the space of four or five
days, there were no remarkable assaults as before. The minister
hearing thereof, shewed him the evil of such a course; and assured
him, that if he repented not, and called back his children, he might
not expect that his trouble would end in a right way. The children
that were nigh by, being brought home, no trouble followed, till
one of his sons called Thomas, that was farest off, came home. Then
did the devil begin afresh; for upon the Lord’s day following, in
the afternoon, the house was set on fire, but by the help of some
neighbours going home from sermon, the fire was put out, and the
house saved, not much loss being done.——Monday after being spent in
private prayer and fasting, the house was again set on fire upon
the Tuesday, about nine o’clock in the morning; yet, by the speedy
help of the neighbours, it was saved, little skaith being done.—The
weaver being thus vexed and wearied both day and night, went to the
minister of the parish, an honest and godly man, desiring him to let
his son Thomas abide with him for a time, who condescended, but withal
assuring him, that he would find himself deceived; and so it came to
pass, for notwithstanding that the lad was without the family, yet
were they that remained in it sore troubled, both in the day-time and
night-season, so that they were forced to wake till midnight, and
sometimes all the night over, during which time the persons within
the family suffered many losses, as the cutting off their clothes,
throwing of peats, the pulling down of turf and feal from the roof
and walls of the house, stealing of their clothes, and the pricking
of their flesh and skin with pins.—Some ministers about having
convened at the place for a solemn humiliation, persuaded Gilbert
Campbell to call back his son Thomas, notwithstanding of whatever
hazard might follow: The boy returning home, affirmed, that he heard
a voice speak to him, forbidding him to enter within the house, or
in any other place where his father’s calling was exercised; yet he
entered, but was sore abused, till he was forced to return to the
minister’s house again. Upon Monday the 12th of February, the rest of
the family began to hear a voice speak to them, but could not well
know from whence it came; yet from evening till midnight, too much
vain discourse was kept up with Satan: and many idle and impertinent
questions proposed, without that due fear of God that should have
been upon their spirits under so rare and extraordinary a trial; they
came at length in familiar discourse with the foul thief, that they
were no more afraid to keep up the clash with him, than to speak
to one another. In this they pleased him well, for he desired no
better than to have sacrifices offered to him. The minister hearing
of this, went to the house upon the Tuesday, being accompanied with
some gentlemen, one James Bailie of Carphin, Alexander Bailie of
Dunragged, Mr. Robert Hay, and a gentlewoman called Mrs. Douglas,
whom the minister’s wife did accompany. At their first coming in, the
devil says “Quam Literarum is good Latin;” these are the first words
of the Latin Rudiments, which scholars are taught when they go to
the grammar-school; he cries again, “a dog.” The minister thinking
he had spoken it to him, said, he took it not ill to be reviled by
Satan, since his master had trodden that path before him. Answered
Satan, “It was not you, Sir, I spoke to, I meant the dog there;” for
there was a dog standing behind backs. This passing, they all went
to prayer; which being ended, they heard a voice speaking out of
the ground from under the bed, in the proper country dialect, which
he did counterfeit exactly, saying, “Would you know the witches of
Glenluce? I will tell you them;” and so related four or five persons’
names that went under a bad report; the weaver informed the company,
that one of them was dead long ago. The devil answered and said, “It
is true she is dead long ago, but her spirit is living with us in the
world.” The minister replied, saying, (though it was not convenient
to speak to such an excommunicate and inter-communed person,) “The
Lord rebuke thee, Satan, and put thee to silence; we are not to
receive information from thee, whatsoever fame any person goes under;
thou art seeking but to seduce this family, for Satan’s kingdom
is not divided against itself.” After which all went to prayer
again, which being ended, for during the time of prayer no noise or
trouble was made, except once that a loud fearful yell was heard at
a distance; the devil threatening and terrifying the lad Tom, who
had come back that day with the minister, “That if he did not depart
out of the house, he would set all on fire.” Says the minister, “The
Lord will preserve the house and the lad too, seeing he is one of the
family, and had God’s warrant to tarry in it.” The fiend answered,
“He shall not get liberty to tarry; he was once put out already,
and shall not abide here, though I should pursue him to the end of
the world.” The minister replied, “The Lord will stop thy malice
against him.” And then they all went to prayer again; which being
ended, the devil said, “Give me a spade and a shovel, and depart from
the house for seven days, and I will make a grave, and lie down in
it, and shall trouble you no more.” The goodman answered, “Not so
much as a straw shall be given thee, through God’s assistance, even
though that would do it.” The minister also added, “God shall remove
thee in due time.” The spirit answered, “I will not remove for you;
I have my commission from Christ to tarry and vex this family.” The
minister answered. “A permission thou hast indeed, but God will stop
it in due time.” The devil replied, “I have, Sir, a commission which
perhaps will last longer than your own.” The minister died in the
year 1655, in December. The devil had told them, “That he had given
his commission to Tom to keep.” The company inquired at the lad, who
said, “There was something put into his pocket, but it did not tarry.”

After this, the minister and the gentlemen arose and went to the
place whence the voice seemed to come, to try if they could see or
find any thing. After diligent search, nothing being found, the
gentlemen began to say, “We think this voice speaks out of the
children, for some of them were in their beds.” The spirit answered,
“You lie, God shall judge you for your lying, and I and my father
will come and fetch you to hell with warlock thieves;” and so the
devil discharged the gentlemen to speak any thing, saying, “Let him
speak that hath a commission, (meaning the minister) for he is the
servant of God.” The gentlemen returning back with the minister, sat
down near the place where the voice seemed to come; and he opening
his mouth, spake to them after this manner, “The Lord will rebuke
this spirit in his own time, and cast him out.” The devil answering,
said, “It is written in Mark, chap. ix. that the disciples could
not cast him out.” The minister replied, “What the disciples could
not do, yet the Lord having heightened the parent’s faith, for
his own glory, did cast him out, and so shall he thee.” The devil
replied, “It is written in Luke, chap. iv. that he departed and left
him for a season.” The minister said, “The Lord in the days of his
humiliation, not only got the victory over Satan in that assault in
the wilderness, but when he came again, his success was no better:
for it is written, John xiv. Behold, the prince of this world cometh
and hath nothing in me, and being now in glory, he will fulfill his
promise,—and God shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly,” Rom.
xvi. The devil answered, “It is written, Math. xxv. There were ten
virgins, five wise and five foolish, and when the bridegroom came,
the foolish virgins had no oil in their lamps, and went to the wise
to seek oil; and the wise said, go and buy for yourselves; and while
they went the bridegroom came, and entered in, and the door was shut,
and the foolish virgins were sent to hell’s fire.” The minister
answered, “The Lord knows the sincerity of his servants, and though
there be sin and folly in us here, yet there is a fountain opened to
the house of David for sin and uncleanness; when he hath washen us
from our sins for his name’s sake, he will cast the unclean spirit
out of the land.” The devil answered and said, “Sir, you should have
cited for that place of scripture, Zech. xiii. and he began at the
first verse, and repeated several verses, and concluded with these
words: “In that day I will cause the prophet and unclean spirit pass
out of the land;” but afterwards it is written, “I will smite the
shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.” The minister answered
and said, “We know that our blessed shepherd was smitten, and thereby
hath bruised thy head. And albeit in the hour of his sufferings, his
disciples forsook him, Matth. xxvi. Yet now having ascended on high,
he sits in glory, and is preserving, gathering in, and turning his
hand upon his little ones, and will save his poor ones in this family
from thy malice.” The minister returning back a little, and standing
upon the floor, the devil said, “I knew not these scriptures till
my father taught me them.” Then the minister conjured him to tell
whence he was. The foul fiend replied, “That he was an evil spirit
come from the bottomless pit of hell to vex this house, and that
Satan was his father.” And presently there appeared a naked hand, and
an arm from the elbow down, beating upon the floor till the house
did shake again, and also he uttered a most fearful and loud cry,
saying, “Come up, my father, come up; I will send my father among
you; see there he is behind your backs.” Then the minister said, “I
saw indeed a hand, and an arm, when the stroke was given and heard.”
The devil said to him, “Saw you that? it was not my hand, it was
my father’s; my hand is more black in the loof.” “O (said Gilbert
Campbell) that I may see thee as well as I hear thee!” “Would you see
me (says the foul thief) put out the candle, and I shall come butt
the house among you like fireballs. I shall let you see me indeed.”
Alexander Bailie of Dunragged says to the minister, Let us go then,
and see if there be any hand to be seen. The devil answered, “No, let
him come then alone; he is a good honest man, his single word may be
believed.” About this time the devil abused Mr. Robert Hay, a very
honest gentleman, very ill with his tongue, calling him witch and
warlock. A little after, the devil cries (it seems out of purpose and
in of purpose) “A witch, a witch, there is a witch sitting upon the
ruist, take her away;” he meant a hen sitting upon the balk of the
house.—These things being past, all went to prayer, during which time
he was silent; prayer being ended, the devil answered and said, “If
the goodman’s son’s prayers at the College of Glasgow did not prevail
with God, my father and I had wrought a mischief here ere now.” To
which Alexander Bailie of Dunragged replied, “Well, well, I see
you confess there is a God, and that prayer prevails with him; and
therefore we must pray to God, and commit the event to him.” To whom
the devil replied, “Yea, Sir, you speak of prayer with your broad
lipped hat, (for the gentleman had lately gotten a hat in the fashion
with broad lips) I’ll bring a pair of sheers from my father which
will clip the lips of it a little.” Whereupon he presently imagined
that he heard and felt a pair of sheers going round about his hat,
which caused him lift it to see if the foul thief had meddled with it.

During this time, several things, but of less moment, passed; as
that he would have Tom a merchant, Rob a smith, John a minister, and
Hugh a lawyer, all which in some measure came to pass. As to Janet
the goodman’s daughter, he cries to her, “Janet Campbell, Janet
Campbell, wilt thou cast me thy belt?” Quoth she, “What a widdy wilt
thou do with my belt?” “I would fain (says he) fasten my loose bones
close together with it.” A younger daughter sitting busking her
poppies, as young girls use to do, being threatened by the fiend,
that he would ding out her harns, that is brain her, She answered,
without being concerned, “No, if God be to the fore;” and so fell to
the work again. The goodwife of the house having brought out some
bread, was breaking it to give every one of the company a piece. He
cries, “Grisel Wyllie, Grisel Wyllie, give me a piece of that hard
bread, (for so they call their oat-cakes) I have gotten nothing this
day, but a bit from Marrit;” that is, as they spake in that country,
Margaret. The minister said, “Beware of that; for it is a sacrificing
to the devil.” The girl was called for, and asked, if she gave him
any hard bread? “No,” says she; “but when I was eating my due-piece
this morning, something came and clicked it out of my hand.”

The evening being now far spent, it was thought fit, that every
one should withdraw to his own home. Then did the devil cry out
fearfully, “Let not the minister go home, I shall burn the house if
he go;” and many other ways did he threaten. After the minister had
gone forth, Gilbert Campbell was very instant with him to tarry,
whereupon he returned, all the rest going home. When he came into the
house, the devil gave a great gaff of laughter. “You have now, Sir,
done my bidding.” “Not thine,” answered the other, “but in obedience
to God have I returned, to bear this man company, whom thou dost
afflict.” Then did the minister call upon God. And when the prayer
was ended, he discharged the weaver, and all the persons of the
family, to speak a word to the devil; and when he spake, that they
should only kneel down and pray to God. The devil then roared out
mightily, and cried out, “What, will ye not speak to me? I shall
strike the bairns, and do all manner of mischief.” But after that
time no answer was made to him, and so for a long time no speech was
heard. Several times he hath beat the children in their beds, and
the claps of his loof upon their buttocks would have been heard, but
without any trouble to them. While the minister and gentlemen were
standing at the door, ready to go home, the minister’s wife and the
goodwife were within; then cried Satan, “Grisel, put out the candle.”
Says she to the minister’s wife, “Shall I do it?” “No; (says the
other,) for then you shall obey the devil.” Upon this he cries again
with a louder shout, “Put out the candle.” The candle still burns.
The third time he cries, “Put out the candle;” and no obedience being
given to him, he did so often reiterate these words, and magnify his
voice, that it was astonishing to hear him, which made them stop
their ears: they thinking the sound was just at their ears; at last
the candle was put out. “Now, (says he) I’ll trouble you no more this
night.” I must here insert what I heard from one of the ministers of
the presbytery, who, with the rest, were appointed to meet at the
weaver’s house for prayer and other exercises of that kind. When the
day came, five only met; but before they went in, they stood a while
in the croft which lies round about the house, considering what to
do. They resolved upon two things, First, There should be no words
of conjuration used, as commanding him in the name of God to tell
whence he was, or to depart from the family; for which they thought
they had no call from God. Secondly, That when the devil spoke, none
should answer him, but hold on in their worshipping of God, and the
duties they were called to. When all of them had prayed by turns,
and three of them had spoken a word or two from the Scripture, they
prayed again, and then ended without any disturbance. When that
brother who informed me had gone out, one Hugh Nisbet, one of the
company, came running after him, desiring him to come back, for he
had begun to whistle. “No, (says the other) I tarried as long as
God called me; but go in again, I will not.” After this the said
Gilbert suffered much loss, and had many sad nights, not two nights
in one week free, and thus it continued till April. From April to
July he had some respite and ease; but after he was molested with
new assaults; even their victuals were so abused, that the family
was in hazard of starving; and that which they ate gave them not the
ordinary satisfaction they were wont to find.

In this sore and sad affliction, Gilbert Campbell resolved to make
his address to the synod of Presbyters, for advice and counsel
what to do, which was appointed to convene in Oct. 1655, namely
Whether to forsake the house or not? The synod, by their committee,
appointed to meet to Glenluce in Feb. 1656, thought it fit that a
solemn humiliation should be kept through all the bounds of the
synod; and, amongst other causes, to request God on behalf of that
afflicted family; which being done carefully, the event was, that
his trouble grew less till April, and from April to August he was
altogether free. About which time the devil began with new assaults;
and taking the ready meat which was in the house, did sometimes hide
it in holes by the door-posts, and at other times hid it under the
beds, and sometimes among the bed-clothes, and under the lines, and
at last did carry it quite away, till nothing was left there save
bread and water.—This minds me of a small pasage as a proof of what
is said.—The goodwife one morning making pottage for the children’s
breakfast, had the tree-plate, wherein the meal lay, snatched from
her quickly. “Well (says she) let me have my plate again.” Whereupon
it came flying at her, without any skaith done. It is like, if she
had sought the meal too, she might have got it: Such is his civility
when he is entreated, a small homage will please him ere he want all.
After this he exercised his malice and cruelty against all persons
in the family, in wearying them in the night-time, by stirring and
moving through the house; so that they had no rest for noise, which
continued all the month of August after this manner. After which
time the devil grew yet worse, by roaring and terrifying them, by
casting of stones, by striking them with staves on their bed in the
night-time. And (September 18,) about midnight, he cried out with a
loud voice, “I will burn the house.” And about three or four nights
after, he set one of the beds on fire, which was soon put out,
without any prejudice, except the bed itself.——Thus I have written a
short and true account of all the material passages which occurred.
To write every particular, especially of lesser moment, would fill a
large volume. The goodman lived several years after this in the same
house; and it seems, by some conjuration or other, the devil suffered
himself to be put away, and gave the weaver a peaceable habitation.
This weaver has been a very old man, that endured so long these
marvellous disturbances.




XII.—_Anent Mother Jackson her Witchcraft._


This story hath as much certainty with it as any human story can
have. The author that writes it is a famous minister of the gospel,
and it is attested by famous witnesses. This woman was arraigned and
condemned at Newgate, for bewitching one Mary Glover, a merchant’s
daughter in Thames Street. One Dr. Boncraft did inform Judge
Anderson, then lord chief justice, That the said Mother Jackson was
wronged; and that the maid did counterfeit; whereupon the lord chief
justice gave orders to Sir John Crook, then recorder of London, to
make trial of them in his chamber at the Temple. The maid being sent
for, came with her mother and divers of the neighbours; and about
an hour after the witch was sent for, and was brought in disguised
like a country-market woman, with a mufflet hiding her face, and an
old hat, and a short cloak spattered with mire. When she entered
the chamber, the maid suddenly fell down backward upon the floor,
with her eyes drawn into her head, her tongue towards her throat,
her mouth drawn up to her ear, her body be came stiff and senseless.
Her lips being shut close, a plain and audible voice came out of her
nostrils, saying, “Hang her, hang her.” Then did the recorder cry for
a candle, and a sheet of paper, and held the paper flaming to her
hand, till her hand did blister; the blister did break, and water
came out which dropt down upon the floor, the maid lying still and
senseless as a dead body, with the voice coming out of her nostrils,
saying, “Hang her, hang her.” Then the recorder called for a long
pin, which he held in the flame of the candle till it was very hot,
and thrust the head of it into her nostrils, to see if that would
make her sneeze, wink, or bend her brows, or stir her head, which she
did not, but lay still as one dead and senseless. Then I told the
recorder (said my author), that I had often prayed with the maid, and
that when I did conclude with the Lord’s prayer, the maid, as soon
as I said, “but deliver us from evil,” was tost up and shaken, as if
a mastiff dog should take a little cur into his mouth and shake him.
Then the recorder bade the witch say the Lord’s prayer, which she
did, till she came to these words, “but deliver us from evil,” which
she skipt over, and would by no means be brought to say them. Then
they bade her rehearse the articles of the Christian faith, which she
did till she came to these words, “our Lord,” that Jesus Christ was
our Lord. I told the recorder also, that when the maid was in her
senseless and dead fits, if the witch did but lay her hand upon her,
she was tost and thrown towards her. Thereupon the recorder caused
the maid to be taken up and laid upon a bed, and clothes to be laid
upon her, especially her head, because she should not see nor hear.
Then he made signs to the women to stand round about the bed, and
that the witch should stand among them, and that every one should lay
hands upon her softly, which they did; and the maid did not stir till
the witch laid her hand upon her, then all the clothes were thrown
off and the maid tost towards her. Whereupon the recorder, looking
upon the witch, said, “Lord have mercy upon thee, woman!” and sent
her to Newgate. Then as soon as she was gone, the voice that came
out of the maid’s nostrils ceased, and she came to herself; and went
home with her mother. About three weeks or a month after the witch
was condemned, the maid continued every second day in most strange
and fearful fits and torments. The recorder hearing of it, did blame
me and all the ministers of London; and told me, That we might all be
ashamed to see a child of God in the claws of the devil, without any
hope of deliverance, but by such means as God hath appointed, viz.
fasting and prayer. Within few days after, it pleased God to make
me an instrument to draw five ministers, and other good Christians
together, to set apart, and to join with me in that holy exercise,
wherein we continued from morning till after candle lighting. Then on
a sudden, after a fearful conflict, which did much amaze some, and
caused them to cry with a confused noise, “Jesus save, Jesus help,”
the maid did start out of a wand chair, where she sat, and with her
strength did lift me up with her. I kneeling behind her, and holding
her in my arms, she did throw white froth out of her throat and mouth
round about the chamber, and on a sudden fell down into the chair
as one truly dead, with her head hanging down into the chair, her
neck and arms limber and souple, which before were stiff as a frozen
thing; then suddenly life came into her whole body, and her eyes,
which were drawn into her head, and her tongue, which was pulled into
her throat, came into their right place. Then she looked up with a
cheerful countenance round about the chamber, and with a loud voice
spake, saying, “O he is come, he is come, the Comforter is come, the
Comforter is come, I am delivered.” Her father hearing these words,
wept for joy, and with a faultering voice, said, “O these were her
grandfather’s words when he was at the stake, the fire crackling
about him.” It seems he died a martyr in Queen Mary’s time. Then she
kneeled down, and offered a sweet evening sacrifice of thanks and
praise to God for her deliverance, till her voice grew weak. Then
did the minister speak to her to forbear, and let one of them end
the day with thanksgiving. And in regard that I (said the minister)
had begun the day with prayer, the company desired me to make it end
with thanksgiving. This being done, care was had of her to put her to
some minister for a year, least Satan should assault her again; and,
by common consent, she was put to me; and I took her home to my own
house for being my servant for that time, and her mother and sister,
and lodged them at my house in great Saint Helen’s, which then was
my living. This relation was published in the year 1642, by the
minister, whose name is Lewis Hughes, and is yet to be seen in print.




XIII.—_King Duff, the 78th King of Scotland, bewitched._


Though this be well known to all who read our Scots Histories, yet
it will not be amiss to insert it here, as in its own place, for
their sakes especially who have not heard of it. While the king was
about the settling of the country, and punishing the troublers of
the peace, he began to be sore afflicted in his body with a new and
unheard of disease, no causes of his sickness appearing in the least.
At length, after several remedies and cures were made use of to no
purpose, a report was spread, the authors thereof being uncertain,
that the king was brought to that sickness and trouble by witches.
The suspicion arose from an unusual sweating he was under, his body
pining and withering away by little and little, and his strength
failing day by day; and since all his physicians had done their
utmost, and yet no appearance of recovery, it was supposed his case
was extraordinary. Therefore all men being vehemently intent upon
the event, news came to the court, that night-meetings were kept
at Forres, a town in Murray, for taking away the life of the king.
This was presently received and believed for truth, because no other
thing did occur for the present more probable. Whereupon trusty and
faithful men are presently sent away to one Donald, governor of the
castle there, in whom the king had the greatest trust and confidence.
This man having gotten some knowledge of the business from a certain
young wench, whose mother was under a bad report of being skilful in
this black art, found out and discovered the whole matter. The young
harlot is taken, because she had spoken some words rashly anent the
king’s sickness, and that within a few days his life would be at an
end. Some of the guard being sent, found the lass’s mother, with some
haggs such as herself, roasting before a small moderate fire, the
king’s picture made of wax. The design of this horrid act was, that
as the wax by little and little did melt away, so the king’s body, by
a continual sweating, might at last totally decay. The waxen image
being found and broken, and those old haggs punished with death, the
king did in that same moment recover. Compare this with the first
relation, and you will find them jump and agree exactly.




XIV.—_The Apparition of Edward Avon to his Son-in-law, Thomas
Goddard._


Thomas Goddard of Marleburgh, in the county of Wilts, weaver, on the
9th of November 1674, going to Ogburn, at a stile on the high-way,
about nine in the morning, met the apparition of his father-in-law,
one Edward Avon of this town, glover, having upon him, to appearance,
the same clothes, hat, stockings, and shoes he did usually wear when
he was living, standing by, and leaning over that stile; which when
he came near, the apparition spake to him, with an audible voice,
these words, “Are you afraid?” To which he answered, “I am thinking
on one who is dead and buried, whom you are like.” To which the
apparition replied with the like voice, “I am he you were thinking
on; I am Edward Avon your father-in-law: come near to me, I will do
you no harm.” To which Goddard answered, “I trust in him that bought
my soul with his precious blood, you shall do me no harm.” Then the
apparition said, “How stands cases at home?” Goddard asked, “What
cases?” Then it asked him, “How do William and Mary?” Meaning, as
he conceived, his son William Avon, a shoemaker here, and Mary his
daughter, the said Goddard’s wife. Then it said, “What? Taylor is
dead; meaning, as he thought, one Taylor of London, who married
his daughter Sarah; which Taylor died at Michaelmas last. Then the
apparition held out his hand, and in it, as Goddard conceived, 20s.
or 30s. in silver, and then spake with a loud voice, “Take this
money, and send it to Sarah; for I shut up my bowels of compassion
toward her in my lifetime, and now there is somewhat for her.” And
then said, “Mary (meaning the said Goddard’s wife, as he conceived,)
is troubled for me: but tell her, God hath shewed mercy contrary to
my deserts.” But the said Goddard answered, “In the name of Jesus I
refuse all such money.” Then the apparition said, “I perceive you are
afraid, I will meet you some other time.” And immediately it went up
the lane to his appearance; so he went over the same stile, but saw
it no more that day. He saith, the next night, about seven of the
clock, it came and opened his shop windows, and stood in the like
clothes, looking him in the face, but said nothing to him. And the
next night after, as Goddard went forth into his back-shop, with a
candle in his hand, it appeared to him again in the same shape; but
he being in fear ran into his house, and saw it no more then. But he
saith, that on Thursday the 12th instant, as he came from Chilton,
riding down the hill between the manor-house and Axford-farm-field,
he saw somewhat like a hare crossing his way, at which his horse was
frighted, threw him into the dirt, and as soon as he could recover
on his feet, the same apparition met him there again in the same
habit: and there, standing about eight foot before him in the way,
spake again to him with a loud voice, “Source (a word he commonly
used when living) you have stayed long,” and said to him, “Thomas,
bid William Avon take the sword he had of me, which is now in his
house, and carry it into the wood, as we go to Aiton, to the upper
end of the wood, by the way-side, for with that sword I did wrong
thirty years ago, and he never prospered since he had that sword. And
bid William Avon give his sister Sarah 20s. which he received of
me; and do you talk with Edward Laurence, for I borrowed 20s. of him
several years ago, and did say I had paid him, but I did not pay it
him; and I would desire you to pay him 20s. out of the money which
you had from James Elliot at two payments.” Which money the said
Goddard now saith was £.5. which James Elliot, a baker here, owed
the said Avon on bond; and which he, the said Goddard, had received
from the said Elliot since Michaelmas, at two payments, viz. 35s.
at one, and 3l. 5s. at another payment. And it further said to him,
“Tell Margaret (meaning his own wife, as he conceived) that I would
desire her to deliver up the little money which I gave to little
Sarah Taylor the child, or any one she will trust for it; but if she
will not speak to Edward Laurence, persuade her; but if she still
will not, then tell her that I will see her very suddenly; and see
that this be done within a twelvemonth and a day after my decease,
and peace be with you” And so it went away over the rails into the
wood there, in the like manner as any man would go over a stile,
to his apprehension; and so he saw it no-more at that time. And he
saith, that he paid the 20s. to Edward Laurence of this town; who
being present now, doth remember he lent the said Avon 20s. about
twenty years ago, which none knew but himself and his wife, and Avon
and his wife, and was never paid it again before now by this Goddard.
And this Goddard further says, that this very day, by Mr. Major’s
order, he, with his brother-in-law, William, went with this sword,
and about nine o’clock this morning, they laid down the sword in the
copse, near the place the apparition had appointed Goddard to carry
it; and then coming away thence, Goddard looking back, saw the same
apparition again in the like habit as before; whereupon he called to
his brother-in-law, and said, “Here is the apparition of our father;”
who said, “I see nothing:” then Goddard fell on his knees, and said,
“Lord open his eyes that he may see it, if it be thy blessed will.”
And the apparition, to Goddard’s appearance, beckoned with his hand
to come to it, and then Goddard said, “In the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, what would you have me to do?” To which it
answered, “Thomas, take up the sword and follow me;” and so he took
up the sword and followed the apparition about ten poles in length
further into the copse, and then turning back, he stood still about
a pole and a half from it, his brother-in-law staying behind at the
place where they first laid down the sword; then Goddard laying down
the sword upon the ground, saw something stand by the apparition like
a mastiff dog of a brown colour. Then the apparition coming towards
Goddard, he stept back about two steps; and the apparition said to
him, “I have a permission to you, and a commission not to touch you;”
and then it took up the sword, and went back to the place at which
before it stood, with a mastiff-dog by it as before, and pointed
the top of the sword into the ground, and said, “In this place lies
buried the body of him whom I murdered in the year 1635, which is
now rotten and turned to dust.” Whereupon Goddard said, “I do adjure
you in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, when did you
commit this murder?” And it said, “I took money from the man, and he
contended with me, and so I murdered him.” Then Goddard asked him,
who was confederate with him in the said murder? and he said, “None
but myself was accessory thereto.” Then Goddard said, “What would
you have me to do in this thing?” and the apparition said, “That
is, that the world may know that I murdered a man, and buried him
in this place, in the year 1635.” Then the apparition laid down the
sword on the bare ground there, whereon grew nothing, but seemed to
Goddard as a grave sunk in; and the apparition running further into
the copse, vanished, and he saw it no more; whereupon Goddard and his
brother-in-law, Avon, went away together, leaving the sword there.
Avon told Goddard he heard his voice, and understood what he said,
and heard other words distinct from his, but could not understand a
word of it, nor saw he any apparition at all, which he now, being
present, affirmeth; and all which the said Goddard then attested
under his hand; and affirmed he will depone to the same when he shall
be thereto required.




XV.—_Some Passages of God’s Providence to a godly Minister, in
giving him full clearness concerning Bessie Graham, suspected of
witchcraft._


She was apprehended about the end of August 1649, upon some
threatening words she had spoken in her drunkenness to John Ranken’s
wife in Kilwinning, whereupon the poor woman, ten days after, took
sickness and died. She was imprisoned in the steeple for thirteen
weeks, all which time I, the minister, repaired to her, but found
her still more and more obdured; in all her discourses she was so
subtle, that not only I could get no advantage by her words, but
sometimes she made me think that she was an innocent woman; so that
I was grieved for her hard usage, if it could have been helped, and
had my own secret wishes she had never been meddled with. Yea, if she
could have made an escape, I being innocent of it, I could have been
glad; for I feared much, that all that we could get proven on her,
would not have been a sufficient ground for the civil magistrate to
give a warrant for putting her to an assize. Or, if they had given
a warrant, I feared the assize would not condemn her, unless I had
advised them thereto, wherein I was not clear, so that she would have
been set at liberty, and I blamed for it by reason of my not advising
the assize to condemn her. At this nick of time, one Alexander Bogs,
skilled in searching the mark, came, being often sent for, and finds
the mark on the middle of her back, wherein he thrust a great brass
pin, of which she was not sensible, neither did any blood follow when
the pin was drawn out. I looked upon this but as a small evidence
in respect of what I found afterwards; yet this somewhat inclined
the judges to send the process to Edinburgh, though there were small
hopes of obtaining a commission for putting her to an assize. My
fears deceived me; for I was informed that a commission was granted,
though with difficulty: But here my strait was augmented; for the
chiefest man in the parish refused to meet, professing he thought all
that was proven on her were but clatters; and I was informed that
others of the judges did say little less; however, I myself could not
think her guilty: Yet if the assize had put her to it, I was not so
clear to advise them, by reason that the things were proven but by
one witness. This put me to many thoughts and prayers, wherein I did
engage myself to God, that if he would find me out a way for giving
me and the assize full clearness, either by her own confession or
otherwise, I should remark it as a singular favour, and a special
mercy. This resolution I did often reiterate, “Lord make me mindful
of it.” After a short time providence brought to light an unexpected
presumption of her guiltiness, which did convince me more than any
of the rest. Upon Wednesday the 28th of November, in the evening,
I went to exhort her to a confession, with Alexander Simpson the
kirk-officer, and my own servant with me. After labouring with her
in vain, we left her; but when I came to the stair-head, I resolved
to halt a little, to hear what she would say. Within a very short
space, she begins to discourse as if it had been to somebody with
her. Her voice was so low, that I could not understand what she said,
except one sentence, whereby I perceived she was speaking of somewhat
I had been challenging her of, and she had denied. After she had
spoken this, after a little while, I heard another voice speaking
and whispering, as it were conferring with her, which presently I
apprehended to be the foul fiend’s voice: but being uncertain, if
those that were with me had heard it, so as they could give testimony
concerning it, and not daring to ask them, least she hearing our
whispering, should have spoken no more, I resolved to stand a little
longer, she having kept silence a time, upon occasion as I thought
of some little din amongst us, at our hearing of an uncouth voice;
she began to speak again, and before she had well ended, the other
voice speaketh as it were a long sentence, which though I understood
not what it was, yet it was so low and ghostly, that I was certainly
persuaded that it was another voice than her’s. Besides, her accent
and manner of speaking was as if she had been speaking to some other;
and that other voice, to my best remembrance, did begin before she
had ended, so that two voices were to be heard at once.—By this time
fear took hold on Alexander Simpson, being hindmost in the stair,
and thereby he cries out. I did exhort him with a loud voice not to
fear; and we came all of us down the stair, blessing God that had
given me such a clearness in the business. They both who were with me
declared, they had heard the uncouth voice both the times. Within a
quarter of an hour I went up again, with two or three able men with
me, and brought her down to the school, having placed six men to
watch, where she remains at the time of my writing hereof, November
30, obstinate and obdured, and I fear she shall be so to her death.




_Some special Providence I observed in all these._


First, That however we knew nothing at our first apprehending of her,
but only that she was of a bad report, and had some boasting words
to John Rankin’s wife, after which she died shortly; yet partly more
and more light brake up, until so many presumptions were proven on
her, as the civil magistrate did judge it equitable to put her to an
assize. Secondly, That Alexander Bogs came and found the mark upon
her, at the very nick of time when there was an inclination to let
her go free, which, though it did not say much, yet it was a mean
to keep her still in prison. Thirdly, That a commission was granted
upon more slender grounds than any which had been granted before; and
that the Lord keeped up the greatest evidence of her guilt, until
the commission was obtained, and the day for the assize appointed.
Fourthly, That the commission being granted, I was in a great strait
what to do, no less being presented to me than her blood-guiltiness,
if I should advise to condemn her, and the sparing of an enemy to
God, if I should not advise; this made the mercy in giving me so full
clearing the more acceptable. Fifthly, That God did make all other
means misgive which I did use, until he should clear me by these
whereby more of himself was seen. Sixthly, That before he gave me
clearing, I was made to engage myself to a special observation of his
most remarkable providences towards me. Seventhly, That I had often
thoughts to use the means of trying her, by going to watch in the
night, if I could hear the devil and her conferring together, but was
always hindered until this time having no such resolution when I was
coming out from her, but only a present purpose to stand a little,
not thinking to hear any thing of this kind; and if she had not
presently begun to speak, I would have gone away. Eighthly, That I
myself was present at the hearing of their conference; if it had been
in any other, I would neither have been so fully satisfied myself,
nor yet others who should hear of it. Ninthly, That not only I, but
two with me, did hear also, which will make a legal proof. Tenthly,
That I was borne up with courage all the time, acting faith in God,
that the foul spirit should not do us harm, though he was so near
unto us. Eleventhly, That I heard as much as did give full clearing
that it was another voice, though I could not get any of the words
understood. The Lord thinking it sufficient to loose me out of the
strait, though he would not satisfy my curiosity. Twelthly, though I
could not get the words understood, yet there was as much evidence,
as made it clearly appear it was another voice than hers.

As, 1st, That we heard twice. And, 2dly, Three of us did so think.
3dly, That I was in courage, and so my judgment not jumbled by
any fearful apprehensions. 4thly, That the accent and way of her
discourse, and in what we did understand of it, was not after the
manner how one regrets a thing to himself, but of one conferring with
another. 5thly, That the other voice was to my certain hearing of a
different accent from her’s, so hollow and ghostly, that it was as
easy for me to put a difference between them in the mean time, as
between the voice of a man and the voice of a child. 6thly, That to
my best remembrance the uncouth voice began before she ended, so that
two voices were to be heard at once. Lastly, A. Simpson understood
their language, and afterward did depone the words judicially.——It
is good (1) For folk to hold on in doing of duty, though they forsee
unsuperable difficulties before they come to the end of it. Let a man
go on till he come to the difficulty, and ere he come that far on,
God will remove it. (2) ’Tis good in asking mercies to engage the
heart to some duties of thankfulness, upon the granting them. (3) How
zealous is the devil to get souls damned, that though he be of an
excellent substance, of great natural parts, long experience, deep
understanding, yet he will so far enslave himself to poor miscreant
bodies as to be ready at their call, to discourse and keep company
with them, that at the last he may get them. How serviceable and
trusty soever the devil seems to be unto witches, yet he cares not
to ensnare them at the last; for he could not but know that we were
waiting on to hear him and her; so that he had on purpose entered
into discourse with her, that she might be taken in the grin.

I come to some other remarkable passages concerning Elizabeth Graham
before her death, giving evidence that she was most guilty of
witchcraft, though she died obstinate, and would not confess. Upon
Saturday night, November 13, she seemed to incline to a confession,
and promised to William Watt, to tell me to-morrow after sermon all
that was in her heart. At which time, I had none with me but William
Watt. When I spoke with her, she regretted her mispent time, but
especially her malice towards myself, which she affirmed the devil
tempted her to. All which time she spake with a very low voice,
that although I desired her to speak out, we could scarce hear
her. Whereupon I inquired the reason why she was not able to speak
louder? She replied, “That when she set herself to speak any thing
that was for her soul’s good, she dought not get spoken.” These were
her words. “But if she would scold and flyte as she used to do, the
devil would give her strength enough to speak as loud as ever she
did.” Within a little I posed her if she was guilty of witchcraft:
She stared with her eyes by me, first to the one side, and then to
the other; at which time, I certainly think that she saw the devil;
for immediately after, she began to rail upon me, although she had
confessed her malice at me was partly the cause of her greatest
grief, and still as she went on in railing, her voice became stronger
and stronger, till at last she spoke as loud as ever she did.

Upon Monday before noon, she was most bitter in her language. I posed
her what grounds of confidence she had, if it would be well with her
soul? She answered, “She had no grounds yet; for she had lived a
wicked woman, and had not yet repented; but she hoped she would get
heaven, and get repentance, and a change would be wrought in her;
and though she was to live but a short while, she was sure of it,
and that I would soon see it.” I thought in the mean time, she had
spoken that in her rage. But after I perceived the devil and she had
a further design in it, as appears by what follows. That same day
afternoon, they came and told me, that she had fallen to pray, and
had many gracious words, expressing her own vileness, and the sense
she had of God’s mercy, and with tears: In which strain she continued
till after supper. I came then to see her, at which time she was
continuing still as before, aggravating her sin and guilt, and
shewing her hopes of salvation, and desire to die. And all along, she
had such pithy expressions, and Scripture so often, and plentifully
cited, that I was put to wonder, considering that I ever had found
her altogether ignorant of the grounds of religion, both before, and
after she was put into prison.

After I had wondered at it a while, without speaking to her,
considering what she had foretold so confidently before noon, I
concluded in my mind, that it was a draught between the devil and
her, to feign repentance in such an odd way, that we might be
deceived; being made to think that she was not a witch, else she
would confess it, seeing God had given her repentance.—Whereupon,
seriously considering the matter, I posed her of guiltiness; she
confessed all the particulars of the process, which did not certainly
conclude her to be a witch; but the rest of the particulars she
denied, as also the crime of witchcraft itself. However, she said,
“She knew she would die, and desired not to live; and she thought we
would be free before God of her blood, because that, however she was
free, yet there were so many things deponed against her, that though
it was hard for us to think otherwise of her than we did, yet she
knew well enough her own innocence.” Thus I have written all those
particulars, as I found them in the authentic record, written by the
minister’s own hand. She was soon after executed, and died without
any acknowledgment of witchcraft.




XVI.—_Anent the Apparition of Sir George Villiers._


Some few days before the Duke of Buckingham went to Portsmouth, where
he was stabbed by Felton, the ghost of his father Sir George Villiers
appeared to one Parker, a religious and sober man, who had been a
servant to the said Sir George, but now to the Duke his son. He
appeared to him, I say, in his morning chamber-gown, and charged him
to tell his son, that he should decline that employment and design
he was going upon, or else he would certainly be murdered. Parker
promised to the apparition to do it. The Duke making preparation for
his expedition, the apparition came again to Parker, taxing him very
severely for his breach of promise, and required him not to delay the
acquainting his son of the danger he was in. Then Parker the next day
tells the Duke, “That his father’s ghost had twice appeared to him,
and had commanded him, without any farther delay, to give him that
warning.” The Duke slighted it, and told him, “That he was an old
doting fool.” That night the apparition came to Parker a third time
saying, “Parker thou hast done well in warning my son of his danger,
but though he will not believe thee, go to him once more, however,
and tell him from me by such a token, (naming a private token) which
nobody knows but only he and I, that if he will not decline this
voyage, such a knife as this is, (pulling a long knife out from under
his gown) will be his death.” This message Parker also delivered
the next day to the Duke, who, when he heard the private token,
believed he had it from his father’s ghost. Yet, said he, that his
honour was now at stake, and he could not go come back from what he
had undertaken, come life come death. This message Parker, after the
Duke’s murder, communicated to his fellow-servant Henry Celey, who
told it to a reverend divine a neighbour of mine, (says my author)
from whose mouth I have it. This Henry Celey has not been dead above
twenty years; and his habitation for several years before his death,
was at North Currie, but three miles from this place. My friend, the
divine aforesaid, was an intimate acquaintance of this Henry Celey’s,
and assures me he was a person of known truth and integrity.




XVII.—_Anent Hattaraick, an old Warlock._


This man’s name was Sandie Hunter, who called himself Sandie
Hamilton; and it seems was called Hattaraick by the devil, and so by
others, as a nick-name. He was first a nolt-herd in East Lothian to a
gentleman there. He was much given to charming and curing of men and
beasts by words and spells. His charms sometimes succeeded, sometimes
not. On a day herding his kine upon a hill-side in the summer-time,
the devil came to him in the form of a mediciner, and said, “Sandie,
you have too long followed my trade, and never acknowledged me for
your master; you must now take on with me, and be my servant, and I
will make you more perfect in your calling.” Whereupon the man gave
up himself to the devil, and received his mark, with this new name.
After this he grew very famous through the country, for his charming
and curing of diseases in men and beasts, and turned a vagrant
fellow, like a jockie, gaining meal and flesh, and money by his
charms; such was the ignorance of many at that time. Whatever house
he came to, none durst refuse Hattaraick an alms, rather for his ill
than his good. One day he came to the yait of Samuelston, when some
friends after dinner were going to horse. A young gentleman, brother
to the lady, seeing him, switched him about the ears, saying, “You
warlock carle, what have you to do here?” Whereupon the fellow goes
away grumbling, and was overheard say, “You shall dear buy this ere
it be long.” This was _damnum minatum_. The young gentleman conveyed
his friends a far way off, and came home that way again, where he
supped. After supper, taking his horse, and crossing Tyne water to
go home, he rides through a shadow piece of a haugh, commonly called
Allers, and the evening being somewhat dark, he met with some persons
there that begat a dreadful consternation in him, which, for the
most part, he would never reveal. This was _malum secutum_. When he
came home, the servants observed terror and fear in his countenance.
The next day he became distracted, and was bound for several days.
His sister the Lady Samuelston hearing of it, was heard say, “Surely
that knave Hattaraick is the cause of this trouble, call for him in
all haste.” When he had come to her, “Sandie,” says she, “what is
this you have done to my brother William?” “I told him,” says he,
“I should make him repent his striking of me at the yait lately.”
She giving the rogue fair words, and promising him his pock full of
meal, with beef and cheese, persuaded the fellow to cure him again.
He understood the business, “But I must first,” says he, “have one
of his sarks.” Which was soon gotten. What pranks he played with it
cannot be known. But within a short while the gentleman recovered
his health. When Hattaraick came to receive his wages, he told the
Lady, “Your brother William shall quickly go off the country, but
shall never return.” She knowing the fellow’s prophecies to hold
true, caused her brother to make a disposition to her of all his
patrimony, to the defrauding of his young brother George. After that
this warlock had abused the country for a long time, he was at last
apprehended at Dunbar, and brought into Edinburgh, and burnt upon
the Castle hill.——I have inserted this story, which I had from the
gentleman’s own brother, a thing well known at that time through
the country, not so much for any matter in it, as that it may be
an occasion to me to speak a little of charms. The word charm or
incantation comes from the Latin word _carmen_, signifying a verse,
because the Roman soothsayers gave their charms in verse. It is only
a strange composure of words to blind the understanding of people,
pretending, by virtue of words, great matters may be brought to pass.
But words of themselves, either spoken or written, (as these charms)
have no force to bring any thing to pass. It is only the power of
the almighty God. Charming is much practised by the Pope and the
Romish church. Their whole forms of religion, both in private and
in public, consisting of charms of all sorts. Pope Leo had a charm,
which he said he had from an angel, who taught him, that whosoever
carried that charm in write about him, and said every day three Pater
Nosters, three Aves, and one Creed, shall not that day be conquered
of his enemies, nor be in other danger, ghostly or bodily, but shall
be protected by these holy names of Jesus Christ, written with the
four Evangelists, and crosses between them, as † Jesus, † Christus, †
Messias, † Sotar, † Emmanuel, &c. It is still a common practice among
the Papists to carry charms about them to make them shot-free when
they go to war; as also hath been found by experience in the late
Irish wars, many of the idolatrous Irish being found with charms in
their pockets, composed by the Popish clergy. They make their holy
water by a charm or conjuration, thus: “I conjure thee, thou creator
of water, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that thou
drive the devil out of every corner of this church and altar, so
that he remain not within our precincts, which are just and holy.”
This is used in the dedication of their churches. Thus, by holy
water, they not only conjure the devil from their churches, but from
dwelling houses, from meat and drink, from salt upon the table. They
dedicate their bells in steeples, which have power to clear the air
from devils. It is likewise a sort of charm which many witches have,
namely, to cut the rowan tree between the two Beltan days. If any man
or woman, horse, or cow, shall have a piece thereof upon them, no
devils or fairy shall have power to meddle with them. An old woman
whom I read of, used this charm when she went to bed,

    Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
    The bed be blest that I lie on.

And another old woman taught her neighbour this charm, when the
butter would not churn,

    Come butter, come,
    Come butter, come:
    Peter stands at the gate
    Waiting for a butter’d cake,
    Come butter, come.




XVIII.—_The Ghost of Mrs. Breton._


Dr. Breton, late rector of Ludgate, at Deptford, lived formerly
in Herefordshire, and married the daughter of Dr. Santer. This
gentlewoman was a person of extraordinary piety, which she expressed,
as in her life, so at her death. She had a maid that she had a great
kindness for; who was married to a near neighbour, whose name, as I
remember, was Alice. Not long after her death, as Alice was rocking
her child in the evening, she was called from the craddle by one
knocking at the door, which being opened, she was surprised at
the sight of a gentlewoman, not to be distinguished from her late
mistress, neither in person or in habit. She was in a morning gown,
the same in appearance with that she had often seen her mistress
wear. At first sight she expressed very great amazement, and said,
“Were not my mistress dead, I should not question but you are she.”
She replied, “I am the same that was your mistress;” and took her by
the hand, which Alice affirmed was cold as stone.

She added, “That she had business of great importance to employ her
in, and that she must go immediately a little way with her.” Alice
trembled and beseeched her to excuse her, and entreated her very
importunately to go to her master, who must needs be more fit to be
employed. She answered, “That he who was her husband, was not at
all concerned; but yet she had a desire rather to make use of him,
and in order thereunto had several times been in his chamber, but
he was still asleep; nor had she power to do more than once uncover
his feet towards the awakening of him.” And the doctor said, “That
he did hear a walking in his chamber in the night, which till now,
he could give no account of.” Alice next objected, “That her husband
was gone a journey, and she had no one to look to her child; that it
was very apt to cry vehemently, and she feared if it awakened before
her return, it would cry itself to death, or do itself mischief.” The
apparition replied, “The child shall sleep till you return.”

Alice seeing there was no avoiding it, sorely against her will,
followed her over a stile into a large field, who then said to her,
“Observe how much of this field I measure with my feet.” And when she
had taken a good large and leisurely compass, she said, “All this
belongs to the poor, it being gotten from them by wrongful means,”
and charged her to go and tell her brother, whose it was at that
time, that he should give it up to the poor again, forthwith, as he
loved her and his deceased mother. This brother was not the person
who did this unjust act, but his father. She added, “That she was
the more concerned, because her name was made use of at some writing
that related to this land.” Alice asked her, how she should satisfy
her brother that this was no cheat or delusion of her fancy. She
replied, “Tell him this secret which he knows, that only himself and
I are privy to, and he will believe you.” Alice having promised to
her to go on this errand, she proceeded to give her good advice, and
entertained her all the rest of the night with heavenly and divine
discourse. When the twilight appeared, they heard the noise of
horse-bells, whereupon the apparition said, “Alice, I must be seen
by none but yourself;” and so she disappeared.—Immediately Alice in
all haste runs home, being thoughtful for her child, but found it, as
the apparition had said, asleep as she left it. When she had dressed
it, and committed it to the care of a neighbour, away she went to her
master the doctor, who amused at the account she gave him, sent her
to his brother-in-law. He at first hearing her story and message,
laughed at it heartily. But she had no sooner told him the secret,
but he changed his countenance, and told her, he would give the poor
their own, and accordingly he did it, and they now enjoy it.—This
with more circumstances, many times has been related by Dr. Breton
himself, who was well known to be a person of great goodness and
sincerity. He gave a large narrative of this apparition of his wife
to two of my friends, saith my author. First, to one Mrs. Nedham, and
afterwards, a little before his death, to Dr. Witchcot.




XIX.—_Touching an Apothecary’s Servant that returned to the Shop
after he had been dead._


This is a known passage, which happened in the year 1669, at Crossen
in Silesia; that is a part in Germany, which long since was under
the Polonians, but is now subject to the crown of Bohemia; the chief
magistrate of that town at the time, was the princess Elizabeth
Chalotta, a person famous in her generation. In the spring of the
aforesaid year, one Christopher Monig, a native of Serbell, a town
belonging to the princess of Anhalt, servant to an apothecary, died
and was buried with the usual ceremonies of the Lutheran Church.
A few days after his decease, a shape exactly like him in face,
clothes, stature, mien, &c. appeared in the apothecary’s shop, where
he would set himself down, and walk sometimes, and take boxes, pots,
and glasses from the shelves, and set them again in other places,
and sometimes try and examine the goodness of the medicines, weigh
them in a pair of scales, pound the drugs with a mighty noise in the
mortar: nay, serve the people that came with their bills to the shop,
take their money, and lay it safe up in the counter; in a word, do
all things that a journey-man in such cases used to do. He looked
very ghostly upon these that had been his fellow servants, who were
afraid to say any thing to him; and his master being sick at that
time of the gout, he was often very troublesome to him, would take
the bills that were brought to him out of his hand, snatch away the
candle sometimes, and put it behind the stove. At last, he took
a cloak that hung in the shop, put it on, and walked abroad, but
minding no body on the streets; he entered into some of the citizens
houses, and thrust himself into their company, especially of such as
he had formerly known, yet saluted no body, nor spoke to any one,
but to a maid servant whom he met with hard by the church-yard, and
desired her to go home to his master’s house and dig in a ground
chamber, where she would find inestimable treasure; but the maid,
amazed at the sight of him, swooned; whereupon he lift her up, but
left such a mark upon her flesh with lifting her, that it was to
be seen for some time after; the maid having recovered herself,
went home, but fell desperately sick upon it, and in her sickness,
discovered what Monig had said to her, and accordingly they digged
in the place she had named, but found nothing but one old decayed
pot with an Hemarites, or blood-stone, in it. The princess hereupon
caused the young man’s body to be digged up, which they found
putrified, with purulent matter flowing from it: and the master
being advised to remove the young man’s goods, linens, clothes, and
things he left behind him when he died, out of the house, the spirit
thereupon left the house, and was seen no more. And this some people
now living will give their oath upon, who very well remember they saw
him after his decease; and the thing being so notorious, there was
instituted a public disputation about it in the academy of Leipsic,
by Henry Couradus, who disputed for his doctor’s degree in the
university. And this puts me in mind of an apothecary at Reichenback
in Silesia, about fifteen years ago, who after his death, appeared to
divers of his acquaintance, and cried out, That in his life time he
had poisoned several men with his drugs; whereupon the magistrates of
the town took up his body and burnt it; which being done, the spirit
disappeared, and was seen no more.




XX.—_A wonderful Story of one Robert Churchman, inveigled in_
Quakerism, _written by_ Dr. John Templar.


Sir, your desiring to be acquainted with some passages concerning
the Quakers in this town of Balsham, obligeth me to give you the
following account: At my first settlement here in the ministry, I
found them very busy in enticing my people to a compliance with their
persuasions in religion; this design they did attempt to accomplish
by dispersing their papers among them. Two of my parishioners I had
a particular eye upon, namely, Robert Churchman and his wife, they
being persons of a very good life, and a pleasant estate, I was under
a fear, that their departure from the church might be a means to
induce others to the same practice. The first in my discourses I had
with him, did manifest a very strong inclination to the principles
of the Quakers. The second was so far engaged, (meaning the said
Robert’s wife) that the Quakers did commonly report, that a principle
was begun in her.

As I was one day in conference with the said Robert Churchman, I
desired him, that when any of their books came to hand, he would
do me the kindness to bring them to me, that we might read them
over together, assuring him of no unwillingness in me to hearken to
whatsoever should appear reasonable. What I desired, he performed
not long after; when I had received the paper into my hand, before
I began to read, I suggested to him, that it would be convenient,
that the person who had been, the cause of his seduction should
be sent for, and hear what was replied to the contents, which he
willingly consented to. When the Quaker was come, one branch of our
discourse, was, Whether the scripture is to be owned as a rule,
which the Quaker denied, asserting, That the rule was within them.
After the expence of two or three hours discourse about this and
other matters, I desired Robert Churchman to take notice, that the
Quakers did not own the Scriptures for their rule, which before this
conference I had intimated to him, but found him unwilling to believe
it.——It pleased God so far to bless what was spoken, that the next
time he met his brother Thomas Churchman, he told him of what had
passed at my house, and that now he was assured, that the Quakers
did not acknowledge the Scripture for their rule; and, for his part,
he would not be of that religion, which doth disown the Scripture
in that particular.——Not long after, the wife of the forementioned
Quaker coming to his house to visit his wife, he met her at the
door, and told her she should not come in, intimating that her visit
would make division between them. After some parley, the Quaker’s
wife spake to him in these words: “Thou wilt not believe except thou
see a sign, and thou mayest see some such.” Within a few nights
after, Robert Churchman had a violent storm upon the room where he
lay, when it was very calm in all other parts of the town, and a
voice within him, as he was in bed, spake to him, and bid him sing
praises, telling him, That he should see the New Jerusalem, about
which time a glimmering light appeared all about the room. Towards
the morning, the voice commanded him to go out of his bed naked, with
his wife and children. They all standing upon the floor, the spirit
making use of his tongue, bid them to be down, and put their mouths
in the dust; which they did accordingly. It likewise commanded him
to go and call his brother and sister, that they might see the New
Jerusalem, to whom he went naked about half a mile. When he delivered
his message, that which spake within him charged him to denounce
wrath against them, and declare that fire and brimstone would fall
upon them, as it did upon Sodom and Gomorrah, if they did not obey,
and so he returned into his own house, where upon the floor of a low
room, he stood naked three or four hours. All that while he was acted
in a very unusual manner. Sometimes the spirit within forced him
to sing, sometimes to bark like a dog. When his brother and sister
followed him, and were very importunate with him to resist it, it
bid him kill them, making use of these words, “These mine enemies
which would not that I should reign over them, bring and slay before
my face.” It made him to utter with great readiness many places of
Scripture which he had no knowledge of before. The drift of what was
spoken, was to persuade him to comply with the Quakers, and it named
some who lived in the neighbouring towns. About three or four hours
being thus spent, he came to himself, and was able to give a perfect
account of what had befallen him.——Several nights after, the same
trouble returned upon him. His wife was tortured with extraordinary
pains. The children which lay in the room complained, that their
mouths were stopped with wool as they were in bed. The disturbance
was so great, that they had thoughts of leaving his house for a time,
and made it his desire to be at me, in mine. I prevailed with him,
not to be so sudden in his removal, but to make some further trial.
It pleased God, upon a continuance with him in prayer every day in
the house, that he was at last perfectly free from all molestation.
The Quakers hearing of his condition, gave it out, that the power of
God would come upon him again, and that the wound was but skinned
over by the priest, which made me the more importunate with him to
keep close to the public service of God, and have nothing to do with
them or their writings.——Which direction he observed till November
1661, and perusing one of their books, a little after, on the 10th of
that month his trouble returned. A voice within him began to speak
after the former manner. The first sentence it uttered was, “Cease
from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be
accounted?” The design which he discerned that it did aim at, was
this, To take him off from coming to the church (where he had been
that day) and from hearing the word of God. It suggested several
other Scriptures, in order to the persuading him to a compliance with
the Quakers, and told him, “That it would strive with him as the
angel did with Jacob.” Upon Wednesday at night, he was peremptory
in his resisting of it. When it began to solicit him, he replied,
“That he saw it was a spirit of delusion, which he would not obey.”
Upon which the spirit pronounced these words, “Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire;” and so left him with a very great heat in his body.

After this he was, in his own apprehension, in a very comfortable
condition; and while he was considering what had happened, a voice
within him spake to him, saying, That the spirit that was before
upon him, was a spirit of delusion, but now the true Spirit of God
was come unto him. Now Satan is turned into an angel of light.
It acquainted him that the doctrine of the Trinity was true; and
that God had an elect people; and that those whom the Father had
elected, the Son had redeemed; and whom Christ redeemed, the Holy
Ghost sanctifieth. And told him, “That the minister of the town
would further instruct him about the truth of these things. Upon
Thursday morning, about break of day, it set him upon his knees, as
he was in bed, and bid him farewell.——The same day it came upon him
in the fields, as he was going to and coming from the market, and
pressed upon him to believe that it was the good spirit which he was
acted with, which he still doubted of. One night that week, among
many arguments, which it used to that purpose, it told him, “If he
would not believe without a sign, he might have what he would.”
Upon that Robert Churchman desired, “If it was a good spirit, that
a wire candlestick which stood upon the cupboard, might be turned
into brass,” which the spirit said he would do. Presently there was a
very unsavoury smell in the room, like that of the snuff of a candle
newly put out; but nothing else was done towards the fulfilling of
the promise.——Upon the Lord’s day following, he being at church, it
came upon him. When the chapters were named, he turned to them in
his Bible, but was not able to read. When the psalms were sung, he
could not pronounce a syllable. Upon Monday morning, his speech was
wholly taken from him. When I came to him, and asked him how it was
with him? He moved his head towards me, but was not able to speak.
I waited an hour or two in the room, hoping that his speech might
have returned unto him, and that I might have gained from him some
account of his condition. But finding no alteration, I desired those
who were present to join with me in prayer. As we were praying, his
body with much violence was thrown out of the bed, and then with
great vehemency he called me to hold my tongue. When prayer was done
his tongue was bound as before, till at last he brake forth into
these words, “Thine is the kingdom, thine is the kingdom,” which
he repeated above a hundred times. Sometimes he was forced into
extreme laughter, sometimes into singing. His hands were usually
employed in beating his breast. All of us (there present) who stood
by, could discern unusual heaving in his body. The distemper did
continue towards the morning of the next day; and the voice within
him signifying to him, it would leave him, bidding him to get upon
his knees, in order to that end, which he did, and presently he
had a perfect command of himself.—When I came to him, he gave me
a sober account of all the passages of the day before, having a
distinct remembrance of what the spirit forced him to do, and what
was spoken to him by those who stood by. In particular, he told me
he was compelled to give me that disturbance in prayer, which before
I mentioned, the spirit using his limbs and tongue as it pleased,
contrary to the inclination of his own thought and mind.—Upon the
Thursday following the spirit began to rage after its former manner,
as I was praying with him. It was very discernable how it wrought
upon his body, forced him to grate his teeth, and draw his mouth
awry. He told me, after I had done, that it bid him denounce woe
against me. It pleased God, upon continuance in prayer with me, to
release him out of his trouble, and so far make it advantageous to
him and his wife, and some others who were so much biassed with the
principles of the Quakers, that now they have a perfect dislike of
that way, and do diligently attend upon the public service of God, in
the parish church.—Sir, you may be confident of the truth of what is
here related by your friend.

  _Basham, Jan. 1, 1682._      JOHN TEMPLAR.




XXI.—_Touching Isabel Heriot._


This woman was born at Peaston, in the parish of Ormiston, and was
for several years a very useful servant to the minister there, for
all manner of out-house work. She was of a low stature, small and
slender of body, of a black complexion, her head stood somewhat awry
upon her neck; she was of a drolling and jeering humour, and would
have spoken to persons of honour with great confidence.

After several years service, the minister began to dislike her,
especially upon account of her not profiting in the knowledge of
God, she having so much opportunity and occasion to know and learn;
therefore she was put away, and went to other service for a long
time; after which she returned to Ormiston town, and was sometimes
haunting the minister’s house, but without his knowledge. She took
sickness about the beginning of winter 1680; and about the time of
her death, her face became extremely black. Within three or four
nights after she was buried, one Isabel Murray, relict of William
Craig the kirk officer, saw her apparition about twelve o’clock at
night, and her white robes upon her, such as she was put into her
coffin with, walking from the chapel toward the minister’s louping-on
stone, where, according to her custom when she was alive, she
halted a little while with her elbow leaning upon it. After this,
she observed her to walk in at the minister’s back-yard towards the
stable. We have only the bare testimony of this one woman for it.
Within some few nights after, there was a throwing of stones over
the minister’s house, and some thrown at the hall-door and windows.
The stones were found in the close next morning, when they lighted;
they fell softly for the most part. The minister coming in one night
(against whom the devil’s malice chiefly was) at the back-door, and
shutting it after him, had a great stone cast after him, which hit
the door very smartly, and left a mark and impression behind it; this
she did, or rather the devil, in imitation of a prank she had played
while alive, for the minister having caused the other servants thrust
her out at the same door, she threw a great stone at it with violence
out of wrath and anger. The foresaid Isabel Murray coming out of the
minister’s house one night, or going into it, was hit very sharply
with a stone upon her back. The servant-man that keeped the horses,
after he had been at his devotion, and was going into his bed in the
stable, was by somewhat gripped by the heel, to his great amazement;
he giving a great and loud cry, the mistress of the family and others
came into the stable, and found the lad under a great affrightment:
this night several clods and stones were thrown, but no person
touched. One thing was remarkable, that an old horse comb, which had
been wanting for several years, was thrown at the lad’s bed-stead
with great violence, yet wronged nobody. The horses would have been
found the next morning standing and lying disorderly, and sometimes
all in a great sweat.——While the servant-man had been dressing the
garden, he hath found several stones thrown at him, but was never
touched, save by one, which hit him very favourably; the house was
sometimes troubled within with some small noise and din.—One time
there was a burning coal thrown under one of the beds. One of the
family upon a night, had his night-cap taken of his head in the bed,
and found the next morning full of cinders and ashes, lying under
the chimney. If the devil could have done more, surely he would have
done it. This is the most part of the trouble which the family met
with, which continued for eight or nine weeks, not every night, but
now and then; during which time, frequent and fervent prayers were
sent up to God by those of the family, and others out of it, which
wanted not success. There was much talking of this ghost, and things
spoken rashly, and some out of malice did invent lies and untruths.
One jeering, said, “Now let the minister and his brethren, with all
their prayers, drive away the devil.” It is very remarkable, after
that time, that there was no more trouble found about the family.—For
what follows, we have only the simple word of the foresaid Isabel
Murray, who, coming home from the church between the sermons, to
the town of Ormiston, to visit her house and kail-yard, for fear of
vagrant cows coming over the dyke, and going down her yard, she saw
in the minister’s yard, being next adjacent, the apparition of Isabel
Heriot, in that very habit she was laid in the coffin with. Never was
an egg liker to another, than this apparition was like her face, her
stature, her motion, her tongue, and behaviour. As like was the devil
to her, as Apollo was to old Butes, whom Virgil excellently describes
in the ninth book of his Eneids, bringing him down from heaven to
wait upon Ascanius.

  _Ascantiumque petit, forma tum vertiture oris
  Antiquum in Butten—Ibut Apollo
  Omnia longacvo similes, vocemque coloremque
  Etrorines albos et saeva sonantibus arma._

  Apollo went, and from the heaven descends,
  And in old Butes’ form, to Ascanius bends.
  In all points, like the old man still he went,
  Whom then to wait on’s son, Æneas, sent;
  Such his white hair, complexion, and his voice,
  And dreadful arms, rattling with mighty noise.

Her face, said the woman, was black like the mouting foot, (one of
her own expressions) the very colour which her face had when she
died. She saw her walking under the fruit-trees, and over the beds
where the seeds had been sown, bowing her body downward, as if
she had been seeking somewhat off the ground, saying to herself,
“A stane, a stane;” for so she pronounced the words; for she had
gathered a considerable number of small stones in her lap, which
the woman saw her throw down at a bush root, near to the foot of
the yard. Some may apprehend that these were the stones which she
frequently cast in the night-time. This woman seeing her, says,
with very great confidence, “Wow! what’s thou doing here, Isabel
Heriot? I charge thee, by the law thou lives on, to tell me.” See
the like expression, page 16. She replies, or rather the foul fiend
in her likeness, “I am even come again, because I wronged my master
while I was his servant; for it was I that stealed his shekel.”
This was a Jewish shekel of gold, (which, with some other things,
had been stolen from him several years before,) “which I hid under
the hearth stone in the kitchen, and then when I flitted, took it
to the Canongate, and did offer to sell it to a French woman, who
lodged where I served. She asked where I got it? I told her I found
it between Leith and Edinburgh. One night,” says she, “I was riding
home late from the town, and near the head of Fauside-brae, the horse
stumbled, and I said, The devil raise thee; where upon the foul thief
appeared presently to him, and threatened me if I would not grant to
destroy my master the minister, he would throw me into a deep hole
there, which I suppose is still yet remaining: or if I could not get
power over my master, I should strive to destroy the schoolmaster.”
It was very remarkable, that one of the minister’s servant women,
had given to the schoolmaster’s servant woman some linens to make
clean, among which there was a cross-cloth of strong linen, which
could never be found, though diligent search was made for it, till
one morning the master awakening, found it bound about his night-cap;
which bred admiration both to himself and his wife; no more skaith
was the devil or the witches able to do him. What way this was done,
or for what end, it cannot be well known; but it is probable, that
they designed to strangle and destroy him in the night-time, which is
their usual time of working and doing mischief. This happened about
the time, I suppose, that the devil had charged Isabel Heriot to
destroy this honest man; yet within two days, a young child of his,
of a year old, fell sick, which was quickly pulled away by death,
none knowing the cause or nature of the disease.—But I proceed. She
confessed likewise, how the devil met with her a second time, at
Elphinston-mill, within a quarter of a mile of Ormiston, and told
what the devil did to her.—And says she, “I was coming one night
from Haddington-market with horse-corn, and met with the devil at
Knockhills, who bid me destroy Thomas Anderson, who was riding with
me; and because I refused; he threw the horse-corn off the horse.”
This Thomas Anderson was a christian man. It is well remembered
yet, that she went the next morning timeously, and brought home her
oats, which had lain there all night. “And moreover,” says she, “I
cheated my master when I went to the market to buy oats; for I made
him believe I gave more money for the boll than I did. And do not
you remember, Isabel Murray, that one night, you coming out of the
minister’s house, got a sore knock on the back with a stone? It was
I, but it was not for your own sake, but for your goodman’s sake,
William Craig, who threw me one day into the Jawhole, and abused me.”
She told this woman likewise, that she would fain have spoken with
her master. After this conference, the woman began to be afraid,
and came running home in haste.—During all this time, there was no
person in the family that met with any hurt or skaith, or saw any
thing, such, was the Lord’s kindness to them all. One Isabel Elliot
a witch, confessed to the minister, that many nights his house and
yard would have been beset with witches. The same woman asked the
devil one time, Why they could not get amends of him? He told her, he
was locked up.—This woman, Isabel Heriot, was never reputed a witch,
nor delated by any for witchcraft; some jeeringly would have called
her so. She was indeed ignorant of religion, notwithstanding of the
many excellent opportunities she had for gaining knowledge. Next her
riding and travelling from far places in the country, in the night as
well as in the day time, and coming home late without fear, and her
stunkard ill nature bred suspicion. If she had confessed a compact
with the devil, before her death, it might have been a good ground;
but this trouble happening to the family immediately after her death,
and her apparition being seen, gave all occasion to say she was a
witch. But these things do not infallible conclude. But what could
her apparition be? It behoved to be either her real body, informed
and acted by the devil, (for her soul could not be brought back)
or only the devil taking upon him her shape and form, acting and
imitating her to the life; which is more probable.

I have adventured to publish this without his knowledge, presuming so
much upon his goodness, love of truth, and useful instruction to the
world, though I should displease his own humour, whilst haply I may,
upon this mature consideration, gratify some more noble principle in
him. For I know nothing in the thing that can turn to his dishonour;
for the best of men and families have suffered from the devil in
extraordinary ways, and it has been their glory, that by their faith
and courage, and confidence in the arm of God, they have overcome
him. If I have erred in some circumstances, or in any other thing,
I am to be excused, since I was not an eye-witness. And what I have
written anent the apparition, was most part from the woman’s own
mouth.




XXII.—_Anent a Magician at Antwerp._


Mr. Tindal, the first translator of the Bible into English after
the Reformation, being at Antwerp, whilst the persecution was hot
in England against the truth, he was told by some English merchant
there, of a notable magician in that place, whose use was at feasts,
or when they used to meet at supper, to bring to the table whatever
wines or delicious fruit the company would desire, and set presently
before them, with other amazing proofs of the power of the devil.
Mr. Tindal perceiving what a snare this might be to some, desired
that when they met together with him, he might be present without
being known what he was. After they were met and at table, this
wretched magician, after this manner, began to try his black art,
but it would not do with him; for whilst he had wearied himself in
observing his spells, charms, and incantations, and what the farthest
that hellish skill and power could do to satisfy the company, he was
at last enforced to this confession before them all, which he spake
with great wrath and anger, “That there was one in the company that
hindered his work, by reason of whom he could get nothing done at
that time.”—I may add to this a strange providence of God.—Mr. John
Craig, that was a minister to King James here in Scotland, being,
when he was a young man, apprehended at Rome, for venting heresy,
as they called it, was shut up in prison. In the mean time Paul the
IV. dies. The banditti that night broke up all the prison doors,
and set at liberty all the prisoners. Mr. John Craig escapes with
an intention to go to Bononia. But fearing hurt there, he set his
mind toward Milan. When he had travelled some days, declining the
highways out of fear, he came into a forest, a wild and desert place,
and being sore wearied, lay down among some bushes, at the side of
a little river, to refresh himself. He lay there pensive and full
of thought; for neither knew he in what place he was, nor had he
means to carry him out of the way. In the mean time there came a dog
fawning upon him, with a purse in his teeth with money, and lays it
down before him; he, strucken with fear, rises up; but construing the
same to proceed from God’s favourable providence, he accepted of it,
and held on his way till he came to Vienna in Austria.




XXIII.—_Anent a great Doctor of Divinity that rose out of the Bier,
and spake to all that were present._


It is written in the life of one Bruno, that a doctor of great note
for learning and godliness, being dead, was brought to the church to
be buried; and while they were in their popish devotions, and came
to these words, _Responde de mihi_, the corps arose in the bier,
and with an extremely terrible voice cried out, _Justo Die judicio
accusatus sum_, “I am accused at the just judgement of God.” At which
voice the people ran all out affrighted. On the morrow, when they
came again to perform the obsequies, to the like words as before,
the corpse arose again, and cried with a hideous voice, _Justo Die
condemnatus sum_. “I am judged at the righteous judgement of God.”
Whereupon the people ran away amazed. The third day almost all the
city came together; and when they came to the same words as before,
the corps rose again, and cried with a more doleful noise than
before, _Justo Dei judicio condemnatus sum_. “I am condemned at the
righteous judgment of God.” The consideration whereof, that a man
reputed so upright, should yet by his own confession, be damned,
caused Bruno and the rest of his companions to enter into the strict
order of Carthusians. The author and relator makes this use of it:
“If the voice of the dead man could affright them unto superstition,
should not the warning of God affright unto true doctrine?”




XXIV.—_Some drunkards destroyed by the devil._


This hath been published in a sermon by a godly minister; but I must
insert it here in its own proper place. On the 8th of February,
saith my author, in the year 1578, a company of drunkards, whose
names are recorded as followeth, Adam Gibbons, George Keepel, John
Keysel, Peter Horsdroff, John Warner, Simon Heamkers, Jacob Hermons,
and Hermon Frow. These eight drunkards, in contempt of the blessed
sabbath, agreed to go to the tavern on the Lord’s day to be merry;
and coming to the house of Anthony Hodge, an honest godly man, they
called for burnt wine, sack, claret, and what not. The good man
refusing to give them any, advised them to go to the church to hear
the word of God; but they all, save Adam Gibbons, refused, saying
they loathed that exercise. Whereupon the host departed; who being
gone to church, they began to curse and ban, wishing he might break
his neck ere he returned; and wishing the devil might break their own
necks, if they went from hence till they had some wine.

Whereupon the devil, in the likeness of a youngman, appeared unto
them, bringing in his hand a flagon of wine, and so drank unto
them, saying, “Good fellows be merry, you shall have wine enough;
you seem to be lusty lads, and I hope you will pay me well; who
answering said, “They would either pay him or engage their neck for
it. Yea, rather than fail, their bodies and souls.” Thus these men
continued drinking and swilling so long, till they could hardly see
one another. At last the devil, their host, told them, that now they
must pay for all, at which their hearts waxed cold. But the devil bid
them be of good cheer, for now they must drink fire and brimstone
with him in the pit of hell for ever. At which the devil brake their
necks asunder and destroyed them. Thus ended these drunkards their
days; and this, by the way, may serve for a document to all drunkards
for ever; and to persuade folk that the Lord has the devil for his
executioner, when he pleases to execute his vengeance upon great
sinners.




XXV.—_Touching one William Barton, a Warlock._


About thirty years ago, more or less, there was one William Barton
apprehended for witchcraft. His confession was, first, that if he had
twenty sons, he would advise them to shun the lust of uncleanness.
“For,” said he, “I never saw a beautiful woman, maid, or wife, but
I coveted them, which was the only cause that brought me to be the
devil’s vassal. One day, going from my own house in Kirkliston to
the Queen’s Ferry, I overtook, in Denny Muir, a young gentlewoman,
as to appearance, beautiful and comely. I drew near to her, but she
shunned my company; and when I insisted, she became angry and very
nice. Said I, since we are both going one way, be pleased to accept
of a convoy: at last, after much entreaty, she grew better natured;
and at length we came to that familiarity, that she suffered me to
embrace her, and to do that which Christian ears ought not to hear
of. At this time I parted with her very joyfully. The next night
she appeared to him in that very same place; and after that which
should not be named, he became sensible that it was the devil. Here
he renounced his baptism, and gave up himself to her service, and she
called him her beloved, and gave him the new name of John Baptist,
and received the mark. She likewise bestowed £15 Scots in name of
tocher, and so parted.—When he had gone a little way off, she calls
him back, and gave him a mark piece in good and sufficient money,
which she had him spend at the Ferry, and desired him to keep entire
and whole the £15, which he declared was real and true money. He
confessed, that they never met together but they played their pranks.
After this confession, he begged liberty to sleep a little, which the
judges granted to him. When he had sleeped a short time, he awakened
with a great laughter. The judges enquired the reason; he replied,
being seriously urged, That the devil had come to him, and rebuked
him with anger, and threatened him most furiously that he confessed,
and bade him deny all, for he should be his warrant.——After this he
turned obdured, and would never, to his dying hour, acknowledge any
thing, for the devil had persuaded him, even from his first engaging,
That no man should take his life; which promise he firmly believed to
the very last. When they told him in the prison-house, that the fire
was built, and the stake was up, and the executioner coming to bring
him forth, he answered, he cared not for that; for, said he, “I shall
not die this day.” But the executioner got presently orders to lead
him forth; and he stepping in at the prison door, was in an instant
shot to death, as they say, and never stirred again. In this strait,
they appointed the executioner’s wife to strangle him, which she did
willingly, a reward being promised to her. When the warlock heard
this, that a woman was to put him to death, “O,” says he, “how hath
the devil deceived me? Let none ever trust his promises.” All this
was done at Kirkliston, before famous witnesses. The executioner’s
name was Andrew Martin, and his wife’s name Margaret Hamilton, who,
when her husband died, clapped her hands, and cried often, “Dool,
for his parting, my dear Andrew Martin.” This Barton’s wife had been
likewise taken with him, who declared, that she never knew him to
be a warlock before; and he likewise declared, that he never knew
her to have been a witch before. She confessed that malice against
one of her neighbours moved her to engage in the devil’s service.
She renounced her baptism, and did prostrate her body to the foul
spirit, and received his mark, and got a new name from him; and was
called Margaratus. She was asked, if ever she had any pleasure in
his company? “Never much,” says she, “but one night going a dancing
upon Pentlandhills, he went before us in the likeness of a rough
tanny dog, playing on a pair of pipes; the spring he played, says
she, was, “The silly bit kitchen gar cast it a pickle, and it will
grow meikle. And coming down the hill, when we had done, which was
the best sport, he carried the candle in his bottom, under his tail,
which played ay wig wag, wig-wag.” She was burned with her husband.

There is one thing remarkable in the story, that he bestowed so much
money upon the warlock, which proved good and sufficient coin. ’Tis
seldom he is so liberal. But surely he would be more liberal, if the
Lord would suffer him to steal, or make use of treasures lying hid
in the ground, or in the bottom of the sea. If this liberty were
granted, he might deceive the most part of men and women in the world
with his gifts. The next relation shall be in confirmation of this.




XXVI.—_A wonderful and strange accident which fell out at Lyons in
France._


A Lieutenant of a guard, called Jaquette, having supped one night
in a rich merchant’s house, was passing home, and by the way, said,
“I wonder what I have eaten and drunken at the merchant’s house:
for I find myself so hot, that if I met with the devil’s dame this
night, I could not forbear using of her.” Hereupon, a little after,
he overtook a gentlewoman masked, whom he would needs usher home to
her lodging, but discharged all his company except two. She brought
him, to his apprehension, to a low house hard by the city wall, where
there were only two rooms. After he had enjoyed her, he desired her,
that, according to the custom of French Gentlemen, his two comrades
might partake of the same pleasure; so she admitted them one after
another. And when all was done, as they sat together, she told them,
“If they knew well who she was, none of them would have ventured upon
her.” Thereupon she whistled three times, and all evanished. The next
morning the two comrades that had gone with Lieutenant Jaquette were
found dead under the city wall, among the ordure and excrements, and
Jaquette himself a little way off half dead; who was taken up, and
coming to himself again, confessed all this, and presently died. This
may verify the preceding relation.




XXVII.—_A Marvellous Prank played by the Devil at Hamelen, a Town in
Germany._


This city was annoyed with rats and mice. It happened that a
pied-coated piper came thither, who covenanted with the chief
burghers for such a reward, if he could free them from the said
vermin; nor would he demand it for a twelvemonth and a day after.
The agreement being made, he began to play on the pipes, and all the
rats and mice followed him to a great loch hard by, where they all
perished; so that the town was infested no more. At the end of the
year, the piper returned for his reward, the burghers put him off
with slighting and neglect, offering him some small matter, which he
refused. And staying some days in town, on a Sunday morning, at high
mass, when most people were at church, he fell to play his pipes, and
their children up and down followed him out of the town, to a great
hill not far off, which rent in two, and let him and the children in,
and so closed up again. This happened about two hundred and fifty
years since. And in that town, they date their bills and bonds, and
other instruments in law to this day, from the year of the going
out of their children; besides, there is a great pillar of stone,
erected at the foot of the said hill, where this story is engraven.




XXVIII.—_A relation of the strange Witchcraft discovered in the
village of Monra in Swedeland._


The news of this witchcraft coming to the king’s ear, his Majesty was
pleased to appoint commissioners, some of the clergy, and some of the
laity, to make a journey to the town aforesaid, and to examine the
whole business; and accordingly the examination was ordered to be on
the 13th of August; and the commissioners met on the 12th instant, in
the said village, at the parson’s house, to whom both the minister
and several people of fashion, complained with tears in their eyes,
of the miserable condition they were in; and therefore begged of
them to think of some way, whereby they might be delivered from that
calamity. They gave the commissioners very strange instances of the
devil’s tyranny among them; how by the help of witches, he had drawn
some hundreds of children to him, and made them subject to his power;
how he hath been seen to go in a visible shape through the country,
and appeared daily to the people; how he had wrought upon the poorer
sort, by presenting them with meat and drink, and this way allured
them to himself, with other circumstances to be mentioned hereafter.
The inhabitants of the village added, with great lamentations, That
though their children had told all, and themselves had sought God
very earnestly by prayer, yet they were carried away by him. And
therefore begged of the lords commissioners to root out this hellish
crew, that they might regain their former rest and quietness; and
the rather because the children, which used to be carried away in
the country or district of Elsdale, since some witches had been
burnt there, remained unmolested.—That day, _i. e._ the 13th of
August, being the last humiliation day instituted by authority for
the removing of this judgment, the commissioners went to church,
where there appeared a considerable assembly both of young and old.
The children could read most of them, and sing psalms, and so could
the women, though not with any great zeal and fervour. There were
preached two sermons that day, in which the miserable case of those
people that suffered themselves to be deluded by the devil, was laid
open; and these sermons were at last concluded with very fervent
prayers.—The public worship being over, all the people of the town
were called together in the parson’s house, near three thousand
of them. Silence being commanded, the king’s commission was read
publicly in the hearing of them all, and they were charged, under
very great penalties, to conceal nothing of what they knew, and to
say nothing but truth; those especially who were guilty, that the
children might be delivered from the clutches of the devil. They all
promised obedience; the guilty feignedly, but the guiltless weeping
and crying bitterly.

On the 14th of August, the commissioners met again, consulting how
they might withstand this dangerous flood. After long deliberation,
an order also coming from his Majesty, they resolved to execute such
as the matter of fact could be proven upon. Examination being made,
there were no less than threescore and ten in the village aforesaid,
three-and-twenty of which confessing their crimes, were condemned
to die; one pretending she was with child, and the rest denying and
pleading not guilty, were sent to Fahluna, where most of them were
afterwards executed.—Fifteen children, who likewise confessed that
they were engaged in this witchery, died as the rest; thirty-six of
them between 9 and 16 years of age, who had been less guilty, were
forced to run the gantlop. Twenty more, who had no great inclination,
yet had been seduced to those hellish enterprizes, because they were
very young, were condemned to be lashed with rods upon their hands
for three Sundays together at the church door; and the aforesaid
thirty-six were also doomed to be lashed this way once a-week for a
whole year together. The number of the seduced children were about
three hundred.—On the 25th of August, execution was done upon the
notoriously guilty; the day being bright and glorious, and the sun
shining, and some thousands of people being present at the spectacle.
The order and method observed in the examination was thus:—First,
The commissioners and neighbouring justices went to prayer; this
done, the witches, who had most of them children with them, which
they had either seduced, or attempted to seduce, some 7 years of
age, nay, from 4 to 16 years, were set before them. Some of the
children complained lamentably of the misery and mischief they
were forced sometimes to suffer off the devil and the witches.—The
children being asked, Whether they were sure that they were at
any time carried away by the devil? They all declared they were,
begging of the commissioners, that they might be freed from that
intolerable slavery.—Hereupon the witches themselves were asked,
Whether the confessions of these children were true? and admonished
to confess the truth, that they might turn away from the devil unto
the living God. At first, most of them did very stiffly, and without
shedding the least tear, deny it, though much against their will
and inclination. After this the children were examined every one by
themselves, to see whether their confession did agree or not; and
the commissioners found that all of them, except some very little
ones, who could not tell all the circumstances, did punctually
agree in their confession of particulars.—In the mean while, the
commissioners that were of the clergy, examined the witches, but
could not bring them to any confession, all continuing stedfast
in their denials, till at last some of them burst out into tears,
and their confession agreed with what the children said; and they
expressed their abhorrence of the fact, and begged pardon. Adding,
that the devil, whom they called Locyta, had stopped the mouths of
some of them, so loath was he to part with his prey, and had stopped
the ears of others. And being now gone from them, they could no
longer conceal it; for they had now perceived his treachery.—The
confession which the witches made in Elsdale to the judges there,
agreed with the confession they made at Monra; and the chief things
they confessed consisted in these three points; First, Whither they
used to go. Secondly, What kind of place it was they went to, called
by them Blockula, where there the witches and the devil used to meet.
Thirdly, What evil and mischief they had either done, or designed
there.—First, Of their journey to Blockula. The contents of their
confession.——We of the province of Elsdale, do confess, that we used
to go to a gravel-pit, which lies hard by a cross-way, and there we
put on a vest over our heads, and then danced round, and after this
ran to the cross-way, and called the devil thrice, first with a
still voice, the second time somewhat louder, and the third time very
loud with these words, “Antecessor, come and carry us to Blockula.”
Whereupon immediately he used to appear, but in different habits;
but for the most part, we saw him in a grey coat and red and blue
stockings. He had a red beard, a high crowned hat, with linen of
divers colours wrapt about it, and long garters upon his stockings.
It is very remarkable, that the devil never appears to the witches
with a sword at his side. Then he asked us, Whether we would serve
him with soul and body? If we were content to do so, he set us on a
beast which he hath there ready, and carried us over churches and
high walls; and after all, we came to a green meadow where Blockula
lies. We must procure some scrapings of altars, and filings of church
clocks, and then he gave us a horn, with salve in it, wherewith we
do anoint ourselves, and a saddle, with a hammer, and a wooden nail,
thereby to fix the saddle; whereupon we call upon the devil, and away
we go.—Those that were of the town of Monra made in a manner the same
declaration. Being asked, Whether they were sure of a real personal
transportation, and whether they were awake when it was done? They
all answered in the affirmative; and that the devil sometimes laid
something down in the place that was very like them. But one of
them confessed, that he did only take away her strength, and her
body lay still upon the ground; yet sometimes he took away her body
with him.—Being asked how they could go with their bodies through
chimnies, and broken panes of glass? They said, That the devil did
first remove all that might hinder them in their flight, and so
they had room enough to go.—Others were asked, How they were able
to carry so many children with them? They answered, That when the
children were asleep, they came into the chamber and laid hold of the
children, which straightway did awake, and asked them, Whether they
would go to a feast with them? To which some answered, Yes; others,
No; yet they were all forced to go. They only gave the children a
shirt, a coat, and doublet, which was either red or blue; and so they
set them upon a beast of the devil’s providing, and then they rode
away.—The children confessed the same thing; and some added, that
because they had very fine clothes put upon them, they were very
willing to go.—Some of the children concealed it from their parents,
but others discovered it to them presently. The witches declared
moreover, that till of late they had never power to carry away
children, but only this year and the last; and the devil did at that
time force them to it: That heretofore it was sufficient to carry
but one of their children, or a stranger’s child with them, which
happened seldom; but now he did plague them and whip them, if they
did not procure him many children, insomuch that they had no peace
nor quiet for him: And whereas that formerly one journey a week would
serve their turn from their own town to the place aforesaid, now they
were forced to run to other towns and places for children; and that
they brought with them, some 15, some 16 children every night.—For
the journey, they said, they made use of all sorts of instruments,
of beasts, and of men, of spits and posts, according as they had
opportunity. If they ride upon goats, and have many children with
them, that all may have room, they stick a spit into the backside of
the goat, and then are anointed with the aforesaid ointment. What the
manner of their journey is, God alone knows. This much was made out,
that if the children did at any time name the names of those, either
men or women, that had been with them, or had carried them away, they
were again carried by force, either to Blockula or the cross-way, and
there beaten, insomuch that some of them died of it; and this some
of the witches confessed; and added, that now they were exceedingly
troubled and tortured in their minds for it. The children thus used
looked mighty black, wan and beaten. The marks of the whips the
judges could not perceive on them, except on one boy, who had some
wounds and holes in his back, that were given him with thorns; but
the witches said, they would quickly vanish.

After this usage, the children are exceeding weak; and if any be
carried over night, they cannot recover themselves the next day,
and they often fall into fits; the coming of which, they know by an
extraordinary paleness that seizes on the children: and when a fit
comes upon them, they lean upon their mother’s arms, who sits up with
them, sometimes all night, and when they observe the paleness, shake
the children, but to no purpose.—They observe further, that their
children’s breasts grow cold at such times, and they take sometimes a
burning candle, and stick it in their hair, which yet is not burned
by it. They swoon upon this paleness; which swoon lasteth sometimes
half an hour, sometimes an hour, sometimes two hours; and when the
children come to themselves again, they mourn and lament, and groan
most miserably, and beg to be eased. This the old men declared upon
oath before the judges, and called the inhabitants of the town to
witness as persons that had most of them experience of the strange
symptoms of their children.—A little girl of Elsdale confessed, that
naming the name of Jesus, as she was carried away, she fell suddenly
upon the ground, and got a great hole in her side, which the devil
presently healed up again, and away he carried her. And to this
day, the girl confessed, she had exceeding great pain in her side.
Another boy confessed, too, that one day he was carried away with his
mistress; and to perform the journey, he took his father’s horse out
of the meadow, where it was feeding, and upon his return, she let the
horse go in her own. The next morning the boy’s father sought for the
horse, and not finding it, gave it over for lost; but the boy told
him the whole story, and so the father fetcht the horse back again,
and this one of the witches confessed.

We come next to the place where they used to assemble, called
Blockula, and what they did there. They unanimously confessed, that
Blockula is situated in a large meadow, like a plain sea, wherein you
can see no end. The place or house they met at, had before it a great
gate, painted with many divers colours on it. Through this gate they
went into a little meadow distant from the other, where the beasts
went which they used to ride on: But the men whom they made use of
in their journey, stood in the house by the gate, in a slumbering
posture, sleeping over against the wall.—In a huge large room of
this house, they said, there stood a very large long table, at which
the witches did sit down; and that hard by this room was another
chamber, where there ere some lovely and delicate beds.—The first
thing they said they must do at Blockula was, that they must deny
all, and devote themselves body and soul to the devil, and promise
to serve him faithfully, and confirm it with an oath. Hereupon they
cut their fingers, and write their name in his book. They added,
That he caused them to be baptized, too, by such priests as he had
there, and made them to confirm their baptism with dreadful oaths and
imprecations. Hereupon the devil gave them a purse, wherein there
were filings of clocks, with a big stone tied to it, which they threw
into the water, and then were forced to speak these words. “As these
filings of the clock do never return to the clock from which they
were taken, so may my soul never return to heaven.” To which they
added blasphemy, and other oaths and curses.—The mark of their cut
finger is not found in all of them. But a girl who had been slashed
over her finger, declared, That because she would not stretch out her
finger, the devil in anger had so cruelly wounded it.—After this,
they sat down to table, and those that the devil esteemed most, were
placed nearest to him; but the children must stand at the door, where
he himself gives them meat and drink.—The diet they used to have
there, was, they said, broth with colworts and bacon in them, oat
meal bread spread with butter, milk and cheese. And they added, that
sometimes it tasted very well, and sometimes very ill. After meals
they went to dancing; and in the mean time, swore and cursed most
dreadfully; and afterwards went to fighting one with another. Those
of Elsdale confessed, That the devil used to play upon a harp before
them; and afterwards to go with them he loved best into a chamber,
where he committed venerous acts with them. And this indeed all
confessed, that he had carnal knowledge of them; and that the devil
had sons and daughters by them, which he did marry together, and
they did couple, and brought forth toads and serpents.—One day the
devil seemed to be dead, whereupon there were great lamentation at
Blockula; but he soon awakened again. If he hath a mind to be merry
with them, he lets them all ride upon spits before them, and he takes
afterwards the spits, and beats them black and blue, and then laughs
at them. And he bids them believe that the day of judgment will come
speedily, and therefore sets them at work to build a great house of
stone, promising, that in that house he will preserve them from God’s
fury, and cause them to enjoy the greatest delights and pleasures;
but while they work exceeding hard at it, there falls a greater part
of the wall down again, whereby some of the witches are commonly
hurt, which makes him laugh; but presently he cures them again.—They
said, they had seen sometimes a very great devil like a dragon, with
fire round about him, and bound with an iron chain; and the devil
that converses with them tells, that if any confess any thing, he
will set that great devil loose upon them, whereby all Swedeland
shall come to a great danger. They added, that the devil had a church
there, such another as in the town of Monra. When the commissioners
were coming, he told the witches they should not fear them, for he
would certainly kill them all. And they confessed, that some of them
had attempted to murder the commissioners, but had not been able to
effect it.—Some of the children talked much of a white angel, which
used to forbid them what the devil had bid them to do; and told them,
that those things should not last long; what had been done, had been
but permitted, because of the sin and wickedness of the people and
their parents; and that the carrying away of the children should
be made manifest. And they added, that this white angel would place
himself sometimes at the door, betwixt the witches and the children;
and that when they came to Blockula, he pulled the children back, but
the witches went in.—We come, in the next place, to shew the mischief
and evil which the witches promised to do to men and beasts. They
confessed, that they were to promise the devil, that they would do
all that’s ill; and that the devil taught them to milk, which was
after this manner: They used to stick a knife in the wall, and hang
a kind of label on it, which they drew and stroaked; and as long as
this lasted, the persons they had power over were miserably plagued,
and the beasts were milked that way, till sometimes they died.—A
woman confessed, that the devil gave her a wooden knife; wherewith,
going into houses, she had power to kill any thing she touched with
it; yet there were few that would confess, that they had hurt any
man or woman. Being asked, whether they had murdered any children?
that they confessed, they had indeed tormented many, but did not know
whether any of them died of these plagues.—And added, that the devil
had shewed them several places where he had power to do mischief.—The
minister of Elsdale declared that one night these witches were, to
his thinking, on the crown of his head; and that from thence he had a
long continued pain of the head.—One of the witches confessed, that
the devil had sent her to torment that minister; and that she was
ordered to use a nail, and strike it into his head, but it would not
enter deep, and hence became that head-ach. The minister said also,
that one night he felt a pain, as it were torn with an instrument
that they clean flax with, or a flax-comb; and when he awakened, he
heard some body scratching and scraping at the window, but could see
nobody; and one of the witches confessed, that she was the person
that did it, being sent by the devil.—The minister of Monra declared
also, that one night one of these witches came into his house, and
did so violently take him by the throat, that he thought he should
have been choaked; and awakening, he saw the person that did it,
but could not know her; and that for some weeks he was not able to
speak, or perform divine service.—An old woman of Elsdale confessed,
that the devil had helped her to make a nail, which she struck into
a boy’s knee, of which stroke the boy remained lame a long time. And
she added, that before she was burned or executed by the hand of
justice, the boy would recover.—They confessed also, that the devil
gives them a beast, about the shape and bigness of a cat, which they
call a carrier; and he gives them a bird, too, as big as a raven,
but white: And these creatures they can send any where; and wherever
they come, they take away all sorts of victuals they can get, as
butter, cheese, milk, bacon, and all sorts of seeds, whatever they
can find, and carry it to the witches. What the bird brings, they may
keep for themselves: but what the carrier brings, they must reserve
for the devil, and that is brought to Blockula, where he gives them
of it as much as he thinks fit.—They added, that the carriers filled
themselves so full oftentimes, that they are forced to spew by the
way, which spewing is found in several gardens, where colworts
grow, and not far from the houses of the witches. It is of a yellow
colour like gold, and is called the butter of the witches.—The lords
commissioners were indeed very earnest, and took great pains to
persuade them to shew some of their tricks, but to no purpose; for
they did all unanimously confess, that since they had confessed all,
they found that all their witchcraft was gone and the devil at this
time appeared very terrible, with claws on his hands and feet, with
horns on his head, and a long tail behind, and shewed them a pit
burning with a hand out; but the devil did thrust the person down
again with an iron fork; and suggested to the witches, that if they
continued in their confession, he should deal with them in the same
manner.

The above relation is taken from the public register, where all this
is related with more circumstances. At this time, through all the
country, there are prayers weekly in all the churches, to the end
that ALMIGHTY GOD would pull down the devil’s power, and deliver
those poor creatures which have hitherto groaned under it.—The lord
Lyonbergh, envoy extraordinary for the king of Sweden, confirmed this
at London, March 8, 1682, and gave it under his hand, that the matter
of fact mentioned here is true.




XXIX.—_Touching an Apparition seen at Gladsmuir, with some other
Gleanings._


I find among some of my notes, written in the year 1666, that Richard
Chaplain and his father George, both of them merchants in Haddington,
coming home late from Edinburgh upon a Saturday night, being the
4th of November 1666, and riding off the muir at a place called the
Two-mile-cross, within two miles of their own home, saw four men in
grey clothes, and blue bonnets, standing round about a dead corpse,
lying swaddled in a winding sheet. Their dog was so feared, that he
durst not go forward, but came running back among their horses feet.
The one brother is yet living, a sober and christian man, who can
attest this. If I have varied, it is only in some small circumstance,
which doth not alter the thing itself. It is the more remarkable,
because it was about twenty days before Rullian Green.

There was one Alice Duke, an English woman, that was taken anno 1664,
and confessed before the judges, that after their meetings, all the
witches make very low obeisance to the devil, who appeared in black
clothes, and a little band. He bids them welcome at their coming, and
brings them wine, beer, cakes, and meal, or the like. He sits at the
higher end, and usually Anne Bishop sits next him; they eat, drink,
dance, and have music. At their parting they used to say, “Merry met,
merry part.” And that before they are carried to their meetings,
their foreheads are anointed with greenish oil, that they have from
the devil: They for the most part, are carried in the air. As they
pass, they say, “Thout, tout, a tout, tout, throughout and about.”
Passing back they say, “Rentum, tormentum,” and another word which
she does not remember.

I read of an old gentleman, an excellent justice of the peace in
England, who did always dispute against the immortality of the soul,
and its distinction from the body, and of the existence of the
spirits. No reason could convince him but palpable experience. He
being a bold man, did venture very far, and fearing nothing, used
all magical ceremonies he could to raise the devil, or a spirit, and
had a most earnest desire to meet with one, but never could do it.
But while his servant was one night drawing off his boots in the
hall, some invisible hand gave him such a clap upon the back, that it
made the hall ring again. He immediately went to the field, to try
if any spirit had called him to converse with him; but found none.
When neither rhyme nor reason could persuade him that there were
spirits, says the gentleman that debated with him, “Well, well, do
you remember the clap you received upon your back one night?” “Yes,”
said he. “Assure yourself,” said the other, “that goblin will be the
first that will welcome you into the other world.” Upon this his
countenance changed most sensibly, and was more confounded with this
than with all the philosophical or rational arguments that could have
been brought against him.

There was one Julian Cox, an English woman, apprehended for
witchcraft. The first that deponed against her was a huntsman, who
swore, That he was going out with a pack of hounds to hunt a hare.
Did start one not far from Julian Cox her house. The dogs hunted
her very close, and the third ring haunted her in vie, till at last
the huntsman perceiving the hare almost spent, and making towards
a great bush, he ran on the other side of the bush to take her up,
and preserve her from the dogs. But as soon as he laid hands on her,
it proved to be Julian Cox, who had her hands grovelling on the
ground, and her globs (as he exprest it) upward. He knowing her, was
so frighted, that his hair in his head stood on end. She was out
of breath, so that she could not speak. The dogs came up and smelt
her, but did no more. The narrative, saith my author, hath the most
authentic confirmation that human affairs are capable of, sense, and
the sacredness of an oath.




XXX.—_Anent one Spalding in Dalkeith._


About the time that the Earl of Traquair was his late Majesty’s
commissioner in Scotland, it happened at Dalkeith, where he resided,
that one Spalding, a town’s man, killed his neighbour, one Sadler.
The murderer fled, and absented himself for a year and more; yet
sometimes came home in the night-time, finding that no man pursued
him. After he had been wearied of this way of living, he resolved
to cast himself on the commissioner’s mercy. He coming one day
near to the town of Dalkeith in a coach, Spalding came in a most
humble manner, and prostrate himself before him, and begged mercy.
The commissioner inquired what the business was? The servants told
him, he was such a man that had killed his neighbour a town’s man.
Thereupon he appointed him to be conveyed to prison, where he lay for
a year and more. At last an assize found him guilty, and appointed
him to be hanged. When he heard his sentence, he cried out, “Oh! must
I die like a dog! why was I not sentenced to lose my head?” After he
came to the scaffold, and prayer was ended, he goes up the ladder,
and the rope being put about his neck, he cries with a loud voice
in the audience of all, “Lord (says he) let never this soul of mine
depart from this body, till it be reconciled with thee.” And having
said this, the executioner threw him off the ladder. When he had hung
the ordinary time, sufficient to take away a man’s life, he was cut
down, and his body put into a bier, and carried to the tolbooth to
be woon. When they had opened the lid of the bier, the man bangs up
upon his bottom, and his eyes staring in his head, and foaming at the
mouth, he made a noise, and roared like a bull, striking about him
with his fists, to the great consternation of all. The magistrates
hearing of it, gave orders that he should be strangled better. The
executioner fell to work, and putting the rope about his neck,
stood upon his breast and strained his neck so hard, that it was no
bigger about than his wrist. And he continuing after this manner for
a sufficient time, was carried to the grave, and covered with earth.
Notwithstanding of all this, he made such a rumbling and tumbling in
it, that the very earth was raised, and the mules were so heaved up,
that they could hardly keep them down. After this, his house at the
east end of the town (as I am informed) was frequented with a ghost,
which made it stand empty for a long time. Whether any have dwelt in
it since, I know not. This I have from a very creditable person, who,
being a scholar there at that time, was an eye and ear witness, who
is yet alive.




XXXI.—_Of the Devil of Mascon in France._


Anno 1612, one Monsieur Perreaud, a Protestant minister there, being
from his own house one night, and his wife being in bed, she was much
troubled with noise and din in the house: the next night she felt
somewhat that pulled the blankets from the bed, and the same night
all the pewter vessels and brass candlesticks were thrown about the
room. The minister coming home, was told this, who carefully searched
every corner of the house before he went to bed, and secured all the
doors and windows, to prevent suspicion of imposture. He was scarce
well in bed, when he heard a strange noise in the kitchen, like
the rolling of a great iron bullet, beating against a partition of
wainscot; upon this the minister went to the room, but found nothing.
The next morning he made it known to the elders of the church, and
a public notary, one Francis Torneus, who sat up every night till
midnight, but they heard nothing till September 20; at which time,
about nine o’clock at night, in the presence of all who were there,
the devil began to whistle three or four times with a loud and shrill
voice, (though somewhat hoarse) which seemed to be about three or
four steps from them, singing a little tune of five notes, which
birds are taught to whistle; and after he often repeated this word,
“Minister, minister;” to which Mr. Perreaud said, “Yes, indeed I am
a minister, and a servant of the living God, before whose Majesty
thou tremblest.” Said the other, “I know nothing to the contrary.”
“I have no need of thy testimony,” says he. This being done, he
says over with a loud voice, the Lord’s prayer, the creed, the ten
commandments, and the morning and evening prayers, and sings the
eightieth and first Psalm. He told the minister, that his father
had been poisoned, and named the man that did it. He told him, that
as he came by his elder brother’s house that night, he saluted him,
and asked, If he had any service to command him with to Mascon to
his brother? and told, they were very kind to him, and remembered
their love to the minister. It was told him afterwards by those who
were present, that a fellow of strange shape came riding on a very
lean horse, hanging down his head, spake to that purpose. At another
time the devil began to mock God, and all religion, and said over
the doxology, but skipped over the second person, and made a foul,
horrible, and detestable equivocation upon the third person. He also
earnestly desired them to send for Mr. Du Chaffin, the Popish priest
of St. Steven’s parish, to whom he would confess himself; and withal
he desired him to bring some holy water along with him; for that,
said he, he will presently send me a packing. That great mastiff,
said he, dare not bark at me, (this was a great house-dog) because
I have made the sign of the cross upon his head.—Then he fell a
scoffing and jeering, and told how he did fall off the ladder into
the ditch among the frogs, while the Savoys were scaling the walls of
Geneva, and did most exactly imitate their croaking. At another time,
he told them, with a lamentable voice, That he had a mind to make his
latter will and testament, and bid the maid call for Mr. Tornus the
public notary, and declared to him what legacies he would leave; and
to one person he said, he would bequeath 500l.; but he answered, “I
will have none of thy money, thy money perish with thee.”—At another
time, while he was speaking, a man who was present rushed into the
place whence the voice seemed to come, and searched it strictly, but
found nothing except a small bottle, which he brought forth; at which
the devil fell a laughing, and said to him, “I was told long since
thou wast a fool; and I see now thou art one, indeed, to believe that
I am in the bottle; I should be a greater fool myself to go into
it, for so I might be catched by stopping the mouth of the bottle
with one’s finger.”—At another time, the minister said to him, “Go
thou cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels.” To whom he replied, “Thou liest, I am not cursed; I hope yet
for salvation through the death and passion of Jesus Christ.”

The devil threatened the minister, that he would pull him out of
his bed by his feet, and pull the blankets off him. He answered, “I
will lay me down and sleep, for the Lord only maketh me to dwell in
safety; thou canst have no power over me, but what is given thee
from above. Whereupon he said, “It is well for thee, it is good for
thee.” And at last he confessed, that he could not prevail against
the family, because they did too much call on the name of God. And
indeed it was observed, that as often as they kneeled down to prayer,
the devil left talking, and often said, “While you are at your
prayers, I’ll go and take a turn in the street. But no sooner was
prayer ended, but he began as before, which course he continued till
the 25th of November; at which time he spake these last words, “Alas,
alas, I shall speak no more.”—The minister told Mr. Du Moulin, that
a grave divine once coming to his house, and hearing the devil speak
profanely, rebuked him sharply for it. Whereupon the devil answered,
“Minister, you are holy and zealous in this company, but you were
not so when you were singing such a bawdy song in such a tavern.”
And having said this; he sung the same bawdy song over before them
all. The divine said, “It is true, Satan, I have been licentious in
my younger years, yet God of his mercy hath given me repentance and
pardon for it; but for thy part, thou art hardened in sin, and shall
never get repentance nor pardon.” On this the devil said, “O poor
Hugonets, (those of the reformed religion) you shall suffer much
within a few years. O what mischief is intended against you!”

A popish officer that belonged to a court of justice, being a lawyer,
came out of curiosity to the minister’s house, to ask some questions
concerning many matters. The minister forbade him, but he would not
forbear. And after the devil had resolved him many things, anent
absent friends, private business, news, and state affairs, and
questions in law, he says to him, “Now, Sir, I have told you all you
demanded; I must tell you next what you demanded not, that at this
very same time such a man (whom he named) is taking a word of your
wife at home.” And then he discovered many secrets and foul practices
of the lawyer. And at last says, “Now, Sir, let me correct you for
being so bold as to question with the devil: you should have taken
the minister’s counsel.” Then upon a sudden the whole company saw the
lawyer drawn by the arm into the midst of the room, where the devil
whirled him about, and gave him many turns with great swiftness,
touching the ground only with his toe, and then threw him down upon
the floor with great violence; and being taken up, and carried to
his house, he lay sick, and was a long time distracted.—The last ten
or twelve days the devil threw stones about the minister’s house
continually, from morning to evening, and of so large a size, some of
them being of two or three pound weight. One of those days the public
notary Mr. Tornus, had a great stone thrown at him, which falling
at his feet, he took it up and marked it with a coal, and threw it
into the backside of the house, but presently the devil threw it at
him again; when he took it up, he found it very hot, thinking it had
been in hell since he handled it last. The next day, upon the 22d of
December, the devil went quiet away; and to-morrow after, was seen a
great viper going out of the minister’s house, which the neighbours
about seized with a pair of pinchers, and carried it all over the
town crying, “Here is the devil that’s come out of the minister’s
house.” It was found by an apothecary to be a true natural viper,
a serpent rarely seen in those countries. Compare this with the
twentieth and first relation, and you will find a notable proof of
the wonderful kindness and mercy of God to those religious ministers
and their families.




XXXII.—_Anent Margaret Wilson._


This is a true narrative of what happened to her one night, while
some persons were attending her: for what passed other nights I
cannot relate, since I want information. They say the gentleman, her
uncle, in the parish of Gallashiels, came on Sunday after sermon to
the minister there, Mr. Wilkie, and told him, that the devil was at
his house; “for,” said he, “there is an odd knocking about the bed
where my niece lies.” Whereupon the minister went along with him,
and found it so; she rising from her bed, sat down to supper, and
from below there was such a knocking up, as bred fear to all present.
This knocking was just under her chair, where it was not possible
for any mortal to knock up. Supper being ended, they went all to
prayer; and rising from her place, went and kneeled down in another
place, and there also a knocking was heard below her, even during
the time of prayer. When she was put to bed, many persons attending,
she fell into a deep sleep; then her body was so lifted up, that
many strong men were not able to keep it down. Sometimes her body
would have made such a motion in the bed, as if something had been
gripping her by the feet, and pulling her up and down. In the mean
while, they heard a loud noise scratching upon the feather-bed, as
with long nails. And likewise the minister affirms, that he heard
a loud risping at her heart, such as risping irons make upon wood
and timber. When she awaked, she told them of many things the devil
had spoken to her, offering her gifts and presents: she was hardly
persuaded to pray; nay could not, even when the words were put in her
mouth. The minister desired her to enter into a personal covenant
with God, which he drew up; but finding one composed already to his
hand, in that little treatise called the Christian’s Great Interest,
he made her subscribe it. When she had done this, the devil persuaded
her with many arguments to break it. This was the method the devil
observed ordinarily every night, during her long trouble. That same
night about twelve o’clock, the minister took her uncle out to his
own garden, to take a turn or two, and began to bear upon him, the
sense of this sore affliction which was upon the family; and exhorted
him to reflect upon his ways, and consider if he had done any thing
that had provoked the Lord against him; and particularly he charged
him with one thing, whereof there was a loud report. He solemnly
protested, and that with dreadful imprecations, that he was innocent
of that particular which was said of him, and absolutely denied it.
She confessed that she had seen the devil as in a man’s likeness; but
especially once going to church, when he forbade her to go and hear
sermon. After much trouble of this kind, and much noise and talking,
the young woman, being but 12 years of age, came to Edinburgh, and
tarried with a friend there; and from thence she went to Leith, where
she served a mistress. At last she went to Easter Duddingston, it
seems, and married there a husband, with whom she lived some years
at Magdalen Pans, where she died. I do not hear that ever she was
molested after. If all the particulars of this business were truly
collected, they would amount to a far longer relation than I have set
down.




XXXIII.—_A short information anent Janet Douglas._


When I was at Glasgow in summer 1675, I was desirous to see the dumb
girl, whom you mention in your first relation. At my first incoming,
she declined to entertain discourse, but by friendly expressions,
and giving her some money, I gained her. I first enquired anent her
parentage. “I do not remember,” says she, “of my parents, but only
that I was called by the name of Janet Douglas by all people who
knew me. I was keeped when I was very young, by a poor woman that
proved cruel to me, by beating and abusing me; whereupon I deserted
the woman’s house, and went a begging.” I inquired next how she
became dumb. She told me, by reason of a sore swelling she took in
her throat and tongue; but afterwards by the application of Album
Græcum, “which I thought,” said she, “was revealed to me, I recovered
my speech.” “I asked her, how she came to the knowledge of witches
and their practices. She answered, That she had it only by a vision,
and knew all things as well as if she had been personally present
with them; but had no revelation or information from the voice of any
spirit; nor had she any communication with the devil, or any spirit
of that kind; only,” says she, “the devil was represented to me, when
he was in company with any of the witches, in that same shape and
habit he was seen by them.”—She told me, she was altogether ignorant
of the principles of religion, but had some smattering knowledge of
the Lord’s prayer, which she had heard the witches repeat, it seems,
by her vision, in presence of the devil; and at his desire, which
she observed, they added to the word _art_, the letter _w_, which
made it run, “Our Father which wart in heaven;” and made the third
petition thus, “As on earth so it may in heaven;” by which means the
devil made the application of the prayer to himself.——I remember,
that one day there was a woman in the town who had the curiosity
to give her a visit, who asked her, How she came to the knowledge
of so many things? But the young wench shifted her, by asking the
woman’s name. She told her name. Says the other, “Are there any other
in Glasgow of that name?” No, says the woman. Then, said the girl,
“You are a witch.” Says the other, “Then you are a devil.” The girl
answers, “The devil doth not reveal witches; but I know you to be
one, and I know your practices too.” Hereupon the woman run away in
great confusion, being indeed a person suspected of witchcraft, and
had been sometimes imprisoned on that account.—Another woman, whose
name was Campbell, had the curiosity likewise to come and see her,
and began to ask some questions at her. The wench shifting to give
her an answer, says, “I pray you tell me where you were yesternight,
and what you were doing? And withall,” says she, “let me see your
arm.” She refusing, the landlord laid hold upon the woman, with some
others in the house, and forced her to make bare her arm, where Janet
Douglas shewed them an invisible mark, which she had gotten from the
devil. The poor woman, much ashamed, ran home. A little time after,
she came out and told her neighbours, that what Janet Douglas said of
her was true; and earnestly entreated them that they would shew so
much to the magistrates, that she might be apprehended, “otherwise
the devil,” says she, “will make me kill myself.” But the neighbours
judging her to be under a fit of distraction, carried her home to
her house; but early next morning the woman was found drowned in
Clyde.—The girl likewise told me at Glasgow, being then under no
restraint, that it was revealed to her she would be carried before
the great council at Edinburgh, imprisoned there, and scourged
through the town. All which came to pass.—For about a year after,
she was apprehended and imprisoned in the tolbooth of the Canongate,
and was brought before the council, but nothing being found against
her, she was dismissed; but thereafter, for several crimes committed
within the town of Edinburgh, she was taken again, and imprisoned,
scourged, and sent away to some foreign plantation; since which time
I have not heard of her.——There are several other remarkable passages
concerning her, which I cannot inform you of, which others perhaps
may do; therefore I shall abruptly break off, and say no more, but
that I am your affectionate friend. This information I have from
a discreet understanding gentleman, who was one of my scholars at
Glasgow several years ago.




XXXIV.—_Touching Helen Elliot, burnt at Culross._


  FOR MR. SINCLAIR.      _Edin. Oct. 8. 1684._

Sir, I cannot but much approve of your design in publishing “Satan’s
invisible world discovered,” especially at this time, when there are
so many that deny the existence of devils, spirits, and witches, and
will credit nothing but what they see with their eyes. I shall inform
you of three remarkable stories, which may be attested by famous
witnesses, many of which are yet living.——I had the curiosity, when I
was a scholar, to pass over from Borrowstounness to Culross, to see a
notable witch burnt. She was carried to the place of execution in a
chair by four men, by reason her legs and her belly were broken, by
one of the devil’s cunning tricks which he played her. This woman was
watched one night in the steeple of Culross by two men, John Shank,
a flesher, and one John Drummond; who being weary, went to another
room, where there was a fire, to take a pipe. But to secure her,
they put her feet in the stocks, and locked them as well as might
be. But no sooner were they gone out of the room, but the devil came
into the prison, and told her he was obliged to deliver her from the
shame she was like to suffer for his sake; and accordingly took her
out of the stocks, and embracing her, carried her out of the prison;
at which she being terrified, made this exclamation by the way, “O
God, whither art thou taking me?” At which words he let her fall, at
the distance from the steeple, about the breadth of the street of
Edinburgh, where she broke her legs and belly. I saw the impression
and dimple of her heels, as many thousands did, which continued for
six or seven years; upon which place no grass would ever grow. At
last there was a stone-dike built upon the place.—My second relation
shall be of some witches at Borrowstounness, which were the occasion
of much inquiry after them there. Anno 1644, a certain woman in the
town came about eight o’clock in the morning into her neighbour’s
house, after a most furious manner, and assaulted her, by scratching
her face, and pulling the hair out of her head, saying, “Thou
traitor thief, thou thought to have destroyed my son this morning,
but it was not in thy power.” The ship wherein the young man was
a sailor, had been under a dreadful tempest off and on St. Abb’s
Head, that morning; with the violence of a sea, which came in upon
the deck, he was cast over board on one side of the ship, and, to
the admiration of all, he was cast upon deck again, upon the other
side, without harm. This marvellous business being reported about
eight o’clock by the mariners, when they came a-shore, and being
compared with what the one woman said to the other that morning, both
of them were apprehended, and, after their confession, were both
burnt, many hundreds being spectators, whereof I was one.—The last,
which is more remarkable, shall be anent the wife of one Goodall,
a cooper in the parish of Carron. This woman was about thirty-two
or thirty-three years of age, a most beautiful and comely person as
was in the country about. She was often filed and delated by many
who had been burnt. They told, that amongst them all, she was the
person whom the devil at their meetings did most court and embrace,
calling her constantly, “My dear mistress,” setting her always at his
right hand, to the great discontent of his old hags, whom, as they
conceived, he now slighted. She was apprehended, and committed to
prison. At this time there was one James Fleming, a master of a ship
there, a person of great courage, strength, and resolution, who had
it insinuate to him by her, when he was exhorting her to confess,
that in respect she understood he was to be upon her watch the next
night, if she got no deliverance as she expected before one o’clock
in the morning, she would lay her heart open to him before others.
At which he being apprehensive of what might fall out, as indeed he
had reason, went to his uncle, a grave and experienced person, who
advised him to take all his ships company, to the number of fourteen
able men, and keep watch, not forgetting the reading of scripture,
and earnest prayer to God. The night was still and calm, like a
summer’s night, without the least appearance of change, when upon a
sudden at midnight, as James Fleming himself was discoursing to her,
and again, as the custom was, holding her by the hand, I say, upon
a sudden, a terrible tempest, like a hurricane, came on, which took
the roof from the house, to their great consternation; and a voice
was heard three times, calling her by a strange name to come away; at
which time she made three several leaps upward, increasing gradually,
till her feet were as high as his breast. But he held her by both the
arms, and (as he used to say, when he spoke of it), he be-teached
himself strongly and earnestly to God, though with great amazement,
his hair standing widdershins in his head. And after the third call,
he prevailed against the greatest effort which ever he felt, and
threw her on the ground, she grovelling and foaming like one having
the falling sickness, where she fell into a profound sleep, for the
space of two or three hours. When she awakened, she declaimed most
bitterly against the devil’s treachery and perfidiousness, who had
promised to carry her to Ireland before four o’clock in the morning,
and to touch at Paisley, where she might see her sister in passing.
She made a free and full confession, and delated many women, some
of them of good repute, who afterwards confessed and died also. The
author of this letter is a person of great honesty and sincerity.
From the first relation of his, we have an evident instance, that
the devil can transport the bodies of men and women through the air.
’Tis true, he did not carry her far off, but not for want of skill
and power. Neither was he afraid to hear the name of God spoken; but
proposing to destroy both the soul and body of the poor creature,
he has pretended so much to excuse himself at her hand.——The first
story brings me in mind of one Creek, a witch put in prison in the
steeple of Culross, to whom several years ago Mr. Alexander Colvil,
justice-depute, came, a gentleman of great sagacity and knowledge as
to witches. He asked if she was a witch? She denied. “Dare you hold
up your hand and swear that you are not a witch!” “Yes, Sir,” said
she. But behold what a remarkable judgment of God came upon her!
While she was swearing, with her arm lifted up, it become as stiff as
a tree, that she could not pull it in again, to the amazement of all
that were present. One person yet living there was a witness, and can
attest this. The gentleman, seeing the vengeance of God upon her for
her wickedness, falls down presently upon his knees, and entreated
the Lord on her behalf, who was graciously pleased to hear him.—Some
are of opinion, that the devil cannot raise winds and storms upon the
sea and land. This is evident from the last relation in the letter,
which puts me in mind of a terrible tempest in the Firth, that day
when Bessie Fowler was burnt at Musselburgh, in May 16. The devil
promised to her, that she should not die at that time; whereupon she
looking out at the prison window, spake very confidently to the folk
below, “You think to see me burnt the day, but you will be deceived.”
The hurricane did so prevail, that in effect every body suspected
that she should not have died that day. The morning and the forenoon
were very calm.




XXXV.—_Anent some Prayers, Charms, and Aves, used in the Highlands._


In the time of ignorance and superstition, when the darkness of
Paganism was not dispelled by the gospel-light, spirits kept a more
familiar converse with families; and even in the time of Popery, what
was more frequent in houses than brownies, whom they employed in many
services. It were unreasonable and ridiculous to rehearse all the
stories which have been told of Brownies and Fairies, commonly called
our good neighbours: how there was a king and queen of fairies, of
such a court and train as they had; and how they had the tein and
duty, as it were, of all corns, flesh and meal; how they rode, and
went along the sides of hills, all in green apparel. I verily believe
many have seen such spectres. But what were they? nothing but the
delusion of the senses of sundry people, whom the devil made believe
they did see and hear such things. Brownie was a spirit that haunted
divers houses familiarly, without doing any evil, but doing necessary
turns up and down the house, and frequently was found working in
the barn, threshing the corn in the night-time, who appeared like
a rough hairy man. Such then, was the ignorance of many, that they
believed their house was all the sonsier that Brownie was about it,
as King James says in his Demonology.—I will not speak of ridiculous
friets, such as our meeting with a lucky or unlucky foot, when we
are going about important business; these unquestionably are the
devil’s lessons for the most part, and denying of God’s providence.
The practice of the Heathen was to attribute good or evil luck to
the slaying of birds, as Virgil says, “Sæpe sinister cava prædixit
ab illice cornix.”—Whether there be any magic in the practice of
some young women too curious, who, upon Hallowe’n, go to bed without
speaking to any, having first eaten a cake made of soot, and dreaming
they see in their sleep the man that shall be their husband, I shall
not determine; but it looks like a very bad practice. I heard of a
woman who dipped her smock in south-running water, on that night, and
hanged it up before the fire to dry. One comes in the likeness of the
man who was to be her husband, and turns it, and went immediately to
the bed, where she was attending the event, and kissed her. It seems
she did not believe it was the devil. To speak of the second sight I
cannot, till fuller information be given. I am undoubtedly informed,
that men and women in the Highlands can discern fatality approaching
others, by seeing them in waters, or with winding sheets about them;
and that others can lecture in a sheep’s shoulder-bone a death within
the parish seven or eight days before it come. It is not improbable,
but that such preternatural knowledge comes first by a compact with
the devil, and is derived downward by succession to their posterity;
many of which I suppose are innocent, and have this sight against
their will and inclination.

Charms and spells have been first taught to men and women in
confederacy with the devil, many of which are received by tradition,
and used by witches, and ignorant persons too. The virtue of curing
must be from the devil’s active invisible application of them to
such or such a disease, as the curing of an universal gout by this
unintelligible charm.

“Etter sheen etter sack, et ta leur etta pachk, wiper sicaan
casemitter in shi, so leish en shi corne, orn heip twa till one
eurcht mach a mainshore.”

There is in some part of Galloway a charm for curing a disease called
the Ling, in these words, “Catheri, Dumi, Chini, Brini.” Another
there is which some use for effectuating that which others do by
casting three knots, “far si far, fa sar fay u, far four na forty
kay u, mack straik it a pain four hung creig weil mack smeoran bun
bagie.” This language cannot be interpreted.—Besides this, there are
prayers and aves among the Highlanders, wherein they think there lies
great virtue, as in repeating the Lord’s prayer in Latin thus:

“Paidder nuhter kish in sheali sanctishetter noman du, ta renada, ta
langa tu, quidi bonum aicht in dearrich, an dingers, an dangis, a
nipis a nopis, induraramis indaramis, indittimis indatamis, shechli
sheclorum. _Amen._”


Their AVE MARY runs thus:

“Ave Mari crashi plena du na takamis pendicata tus onte willie
yeramis, penedicata rucara shendri Esum Christum. _Amen._”

At night, in the time of Popery, when folks went to bed, they
believed the repetition of the following prayer was effectual to
preserve them from danger, and the house too.

      “Who sains the house the night?
    They that sains it ilka night:
    Saint Bryde and her brate,
    Saint Colme and his hat,
    Saint Michael and his spear,
    Keep this house from the weir;
    From running thief;
    And burning thief;
    And from a’ ill Rea,
    That be the gate can gae;
    And from an ill wight,
    That be the gate can light.
    Nine reeds about the house;
    Keep it all the night.
    What is that, what I see
    So red, so bright, beyond the sea?
    ’Tis he was pierc’d through the hands,
    Through the feet, through the throat,
    Through the tongue;
    Through the liver and the lung.
    Well is them that well may
    Fast on Good-Friday.”

Another prayer, used by the thieves and robbers on the Borders after
meat, in order to stealing from their neighbours.

      “He that ordain’d us to be born,
    Send us more meat for the morn,
    Part of’t right and part of’t wrang:
    God let us never fast owre lang.
    God be thanked, and our Lady,
    All is done that we have ready.”

A country-man in East Lothian used this grace always before and after
meat.

      “Lord be bless’d for all his gifts,
    Defy the devil and all his shifts;
    God sent me mair silver. _Amen._”

As the devil is originally the author of charms and spells, so is he
the author of several bawdy songs which are sung. A reverend minister
told me, that one who was the devil’s piper, a wizzard, confessed to
him, that at a ball of dancing, the foul spirit taught him a bawdy
song, to sing and play, as it were this night, and ere two days
passed, all the lads and lasses of the town were lilting it through
the street. It were an abomination to rehearse it.




XXXVI.—_Anent one Lizzie Muidy at Haddington._


This woman was a servant to Margaret Kirkwood there, a woman of
good repute once, who before her death, took some trouble of mind,
upon what account I shall not determine. She made some insinuation,
it seems, to some of her friends, that she inclined to put hand on
herself; whereupon she was attended and waited upon; but had her own
liberty to retire herself to private prayer; in which exercise she
was very frequent. Upon a Sabbath forenoon, when all were at church
and she at home, none with her save only a servant-maid, she went
into some high room or other, as she was wont to do, to her devotion,
and there, before the maid could know, she hanged herself. In this
very moment of time, this Elizabeth Muidy, her old servant, being in
church, was observed to number upon her fingers fifty, or fifty-one,
which number being ended, she cries out, with a loud voice, in
presence of all, “Now the turn is done.” She was presently taken away
as a distracted person; and news coming to the church, that such a
woman had hanged herself, her old mistress, she was taken away to
prison; but what her confession was, it is not well known. There are
many other things reported, whereof I cannot give an account. This
tragedy was acted within these few years at Haddington.




XXXVII.—_Anent Major Weir and his Sister._


This man, Thomas Weir, was born at Clydesdale, near to Lanark, who
had been a lieutenant in Ireland long since. What way he came to get
some public command in the city of Edinburgh, in the years 1649 and
50, I know not: but it seems he has always been called Major Weir
since that time. Many things might be narrated of him, which for
brevity’s sake, I cannot meddle with, since I intend only to speak
of his sorceries, and other things relating thereunto. It seems he
had, before he was burnt, some charge over the waiters at the ports
of the city, being, as it were, a check to them. Coming one day, as
his custom was, he found some of them in a cellar, taking a cup of
ale, neglecting their charge. After a gentle reproof, one of them
replied, That some of their number being upon duty, the rest had
retired to drink with their old friend Mr. Burn. At which he started
back, and casting an eye upon him, repeated the word Burn four or
five times: and going home, he never came abroad afterwards, till a
few weeks after he had discovered his impieties. It was observed by
some, that going to Liberton sometimes, he shunned to step over that
water brook, which is ordinarily called Liberton-burn, but went about
to shun it. Some have conjectured that he had advice to beware of a
burn, or some other thing which this equivocal word might signify,
as burn in a fire. If so, he has foreseen his day approaching. A
year before he discovered himself, he took a sore sickness; during
which time he spake to all who visited him like an angel, and came
frequently abroad again.——This man taking some dreadful tortures
of conscience, and the terrors of the Almighty being upon his
spirit, confessed to several neighbours in his own house, and that
most willingly, particular sins which he was guilty of, which bred
amazement to all persons, they coming from a man of so high repute
for religion and piety. He ended with this remarkable expression,
“Before God, (says he) I have not told you the hundred part of what
I can say more, and am guilty of.” These very same abominations he
confessed before the judges likewise. But after this, he would never,
till his dying hour confess any more, which might have been for
the glorifying of God, and the edification of others, but remained
stupid, having no confidence to look any man in the face, or to
open his eyes.—When two of the magistrates came to his house in the
night-time to carry him to prison, they asked, If he had any money to
secure? He answered none. His sister said there was. Whereupon, to
the value of five dollars, in parcels here and there, were found in
several clouts. His sister advised the two magistrates to secure his
staff especially; for she also went to prison. After he was secured
in the tolbooth, the bailies returned, and went into a tavern near
to Weir’s house in the West-bow, a street so called there. The money
was put into a bag, and the clouts thrown into the fire, by the
master of the house and his wife; which, after an unusual manner made
a circling and dancing in the fire. There was another clout found
with some hard thing it, which they threw into the fire likewise; it
being a certain root, which circled and sparkled like gun-powder,
and passing from the tunnel of the chimney, it gave a crack like a
little cannon, to the amazement of all that were present.—The money
aforesaid was taken by one of the bailies to his own house, and laid
by in his closet. After family-prayer was ended, he retired into the
same closet, (where I have been) during which time his wife, who
is yet living, and the rest of the family, were affrighted with a
terrible noise within the study, like the falling of a house, about
three times together. His wife knocking, gave a fearful cry, “My
dear, are you alive?” The bailie came out unafraid, having (as he
said) heard nothing; whether he concealed this upon the account his
wife was with child, or otherwise, it cannot be well known. The money
was presently sent away to another bailie’s house, a great distance
from Weir’s; where, as was reported, there was some disturbance, but
in broken expressions.

During the time of his imprisonment, he was never willing to be
spoken to; and when the ministers of the city offered to pray
for him, he would cry out in fury, “Torment me no more, for I am
tormented already.” One minister (now asleep) asking him, If he
should pray for him? was answered, Not at all. The other replied,
in a kind of holy anger, “Sir, I will pray for you in spite of your
teeth, and the devil your master too,” who did pray, making him at
least to hear him; but the other staring wildly, was senseless as
a brute. Another, who is likewise at rest, demanded, if he thought
there was a God; said the man, I know not. That other replied
smartly, “O man, the argument that moveth me to think there is a God,
is thyself; for what else moveth thee to inform the world of thy
wicked life?” But Weir answered, Let me alone. When he peremptorily
forbade one of his own parish ministers, (yet alive) to pray, one
demanded, if he would have any of the presbyterian persuasion to
pray, he answered, “Sir, you are all alike to me.” Then said the
minister to him, “I will pray with you.” “Do it not,” said the other,
“upon your peril;” looking up to the beams of the house. But prayer
was offered up so much the more heartily, because the company about
expected some vision. It is observable, that in things common he
was pertinent enough; but when any thing about Almighty God, and
his soul’s condition, came about, he would shrug, and rub his coat
and breast, saying to them, “Torment me not before the time.” When
he was at the stake to be burnt, the city ministers called to a
churchman there looking on, being one of that persuasion whereof
Weir was formerly deemed to be, to speak to him; but no sooner had
he opened his mouth, than he made a sign with his head to be silent.
When the rope was about his neck to prepare him for the fire, he was
bid say, Lord be merciful to me; but he answered, “Let me alone, I
will not; I have lived as a beast, and I must die as a beast.” The
fire being kindled, both he and his staff, a little after, fell into
the flames. Whatever incantation was in his staff, is not for me to
discuss. He could not officiate in any holy duty, without his rod
in his hand, and leaning upon it, which made those who heard him
pray, admire his fluency in prayer. Its falling into the fire with
him, (let others search out the disparity) minds me of this passage.
In Zetland a few years ago, a judge having condemned an old woman
and her daughter, called Helen Stewart, for witchcraft, sent them
to be burned. The main was so stupid, that she was thought to be
possessed. When she had hung some little time on the gibbet, a black
pitchy-like ball foamed out of her mouth; and after the fire was
kindled, it grew to the bigness of a walnut, and then flew up like
squibs into the air, which the judge, yet living, attests. It was
taken to be a visible sign, that the devil was gone out of her. I
shall not make application of this as to Mr. Weir’s staff.——I know
from good hands, that if this man repented of any thing in prison,
it was for causing a poor maid to be scourged, who affirmed, she had
seen him commit bestiality going to Newmills to a solemn meeting.
This poor woman lived about two years after his death, and heard of
his fatal end. His incest with his own sister, was first when she
was a young maid. The place where this abomination was committed,
was cursed; for, contrary to nature, it remained always bare without
grass. A reverend minister told me, (I mention this as from myself,
not from the author of the letter) that Major Weir confessed so much
to him, and told him, that the place lies off the road-way between
Kirkcaldy and Kinghorn, upon a little hill-side; which he had the
curiosity to go and see, and found it so. This was done the matter of
fifty years ago. Many other things he confessed, which Christian ears
should not be defiled with.—Before I come to his sister, take this
notable remark from two persons yet alive, dwelling at the foot of
the West-Bow, at the head whereof dwelt Major Weir. This gentlewoman,
a substantial merchant’s wife, was very desirous to hear him pray,
much being spoken of his utterance; and for that end spoke to some of
her neighbours, that when he came to their house, she might be sent
for. This was done, but he could never be persuaded to open his mouth
before her; no, not to bless a cup of ale; he either remained mute,
or up with his staff and away. It troubled her then; but I suppose
both her husband and she smiles at it now.

Some few days before he discovered himself, this gentlewoman coming
from the Castle-hill, where her husband’s niece was lying-in of a
child, about midnight, perceived, about the Bow-head, three women
in windows, shouting, laughing, and clapping their hands. The
gentlewoman went forward, till, just at Major Weir’s door, there
arose, as from the street, a woman about the length of two ordinary
females, and stepped forward. The gentlewoman, not as yet excessively
feared, bid her maid step on, if, by the lanthorn, they could see
what she was; but haste what they could, this long-legged spectre was
still before them, moving her body with a vehement cachinnation, and
great unmeasurable laughter. At this rate the two strove for place,
till the giantess came to a narrow lane in the Bow, commonly called
the stinking-close, into which she turning, and the gentlewoman
looking after her, perceived the close full of flaming torches,
(she could give them no other name,) and as it had been a great
multitude of people, stentoriously laughing and gaping with tehees
of laughter. This sight, at so dead a time of the night, no people
being in the windows belonging to the close, made her and her servant
haste home, declaring all what they saw to the rest of the family;
but more passionately to her husband. And though sick with fear, yet
she went the next morning with her maid, to view the noted places of
her former night’s walk, and at the close inquired who lived there?
It was answered, Major Weir. The honest couple now rejoiced, that to
Weir’s devotion they never said, Amen. I know there are some, who
strenuously assert the unreasonableness of believing such visions
and apparitions; but you have made them sufficiently evident from
your relation foregoing. These, in all probability, have been a
presage of his approaching death, and of the manner of it, links
and torches signifying an honourable interment, which perhaps had
been promised to him. There was one minister in the city, that could
never be persuaded to speak with him in prison; but no sooner was he
dead, than he went to the tolbooth, and called for his sister, who
had some remorse; of whom I shall now speak. He told her, that her
brother was burnt, and how he died, (though he saw him not executed)
as I heard from himself. She believed nothing of it; but after many
attestations, he asked, where his staff was? for, it seems, she knew
that his strength and life lay therein. He told her, it was burnt
with him. Whereupon, notwithstanding of her age, she nimbly, and in
a furious rage, fell on her knees, uttering words horrible to be
remembered. And in rising up, as she was desired, her raging agony
closed with these words, “O Sir, I know he is with the devils; for
with them he lived.” She entreated that minister to assist her,
and attend her to her death, which, at her violent importunity, he
yielded unto, though it was not his course to wait upon condemned
persons. What she said in private to himself, he says, must die with
him. She avouched, that from her being sixteen years of age, to
her fiftieth, her brother had the incestuous use of her, and then
loathed her for her age. She was pretty old at this time; and he,
when he died, was about seventy. He asked her, If ever she was with
child to him? She declared, with great confidence, he hindered that
by means abominable: which, she beginning to relate, the minister
stopped her. Some bystanders were desirous to hear the rest; but says
he, “Gentlemen, the speculation of this iniquity is in itself to be
punished.”—In often and returned visits, she was interrogated, If she
had any hand in her brother’s devilry? She declared but in a passive
way; and gave this for an instance: A fiery chariot or coach, as she
called it, coming to his door, at broad day, a stranger invied him
and her to go and visit a friend in Dalkeith, a small town about six
miles from Edinburgh. They both entered, and went forward in their
visit; at which time (says she) one came and whispered something
in his ear, which affected him. They both returned after the same
manner that they had gone out. And Weir going after to make some
visits, told them he had strong apprehensions, that that day the
King’s forces were routed at Worcester; which, within a few days,
was confirmed by post. She affirmed, that none saw the coach but
themselves. The devil hath wrought far greater farlies in his time
than this.—She knew much of the enchanted staff; for by it he was
enabled to pray; to commit filthiness, not to be named; yea even to
reconcile neighbours, man and wife, when at variance. She oft hid
it from him; and because without it he could do nothing, he would
threaten and vow to discover her incest; fearing which, she would
deliver it again. Being asked the cause of her much spinning, which
she was famous for, she denied any assistance from the devil, but
found she had an extraordinary faculty therein, far above ordinary
spinsters; yet owned, that when she came home, after her being
abroad, she found there was more yarn on her wheel than she left: and
that her weaver could not make cloth thereof, the yarn breaking, or
falling from the loom.——Once there came a stranger to her, while she
was at her wheel, and proposed a way to her to make her rick; for
they both lived almost upon alms. The way was this, “Stand up and
say, all crosses and cares go out of this house.” She answered, “God
forbid, I say that, but let them be welcome when God sends them.”
After two or three visits more, she asked this stranger, where she
dwelt? She replied, “In the Potterrow,” a street in the suburbs of
that city; but finding neither such a house, nor such a woman, I
judged, said she, it was the devil, one of my brother’s acquaintance;
for I know he had familiarity with the devil.

His poverty minds me of a wizzard accused and execute in Zetland,
before named, for witchcraft, several years ago, called Luggy to a
nick-name; who being a fisher, had a trick, at any time when hungry
at sea, to cast out his line, and would out of Neptune’s lowest
kitchen, bring cleverly up fish well boiled and roasted; and his
comrades, by a natural courage, would make a merry meal thereof, not
questioning who was cook. He had another piece of art, at any time
of the year, or in great storms, to go up to a hill near his own
house, whereupon there was a deep pit, out of which, with his lines,
he drew up codlings or keiling for his provision, which never man
could but himself. This history is true, being yet to be seen in the
criminal books of that country.—She was asked anent her parents? She
was persuaded her mother was a witch; “for the secretest thing that
either I myself, or any of the family could do, when once a mark
appeared on her brow, she could tell it them, though done at a great
distance. Being demanded what sort of a mark it was? She answered,
“I have some such like mark myself, when I please, on my forehead.”
Whereupon she offered to uncover her head for visible satisfaction;
the minister refusing to behold it, and forbidding any discovery,
was earnestly requested by some spectators, to allow the freedom. He
yielded: She put back her head dress, and seeming to frown, there was
seen an exact horse shoe shaped for nails in her wrinkles, terrible
enough, I assure you, to the stoutest beholder. In the morning before
her execution, she told the minister, she resolved to die with all
the shame she could, to expiate, under mercy, her shameful life;
this he understood to be an ingenuous confession of her sins in
opposition to her brother’s despair and desperate silence, to which
he did encourage her. At her parting with him, she gave him hearty
thanks for his pains; and shaking his hands, offering to kiss them;
she repeated the same words which he bade her perform. Ascending up
the ladder, she spoke somewhat confusedly of her sins, of her brother
and his enchanting staff; and with a ghastly countenance, beholding
a multitude of spectators, all wondering, and some weeping, she
spake aloud, “There are many here this day, wondering and greeting
for me, but alas! few mourn for a broken——;” at which words, many
seemed angry: some called to her to mind higher concerns; and I have
heard it said, that the preacher declared, he had much ado to keep
a composed countenance. The executioner falling about his duty, she
prepares to die stark-naked; then, and not before, were her words
relating to shame understood; the hangman struggled with her to keep
on her clothes, and she struggled with him to have them off. At last
he was forced to throw her over open-faced, which afterwards he
covered with a cloth.——So much from the gentleman that gave me this
information; to which I shall add, that this is not published with
a design to reflect upon men of this or that persuasion, far be it.
The devil can counterfeit what religion he pleases, and ordinarily
a good one. True religion can never suffer any prejudice from a
hypocrite’s wearing a cloak of it, more than the good angels can
suffer a stain by Satan’s transforming himself into an angel of
light. The devil hath his lackies and pages with Christ’s livery upon
them. Was not Judas, who was but one of the twelve, a vile hypocrite?
It is a wonder, where there are a thousand professing Christ in a
congregation, that a hundred of them are not as bad. His glistering
cloak of religion dazzled all men’s eyes; this was needful. Foul
faults must have a cloak to cover them. The apostle Jude speaks of
some that go after Sarko’s heteras, which may be understood, not
only of that sin mentioned, Rom., i. 27. but of another sort of
flesh, not to be named. Here was a demonstration, proving evidently
that there is a God, viz. by the terrors of his conscience. It is
evident also, there is a devil that hurries men on into sin. He had
this expression to two ministers that came to see him in prison;
there was no temptation which the devil could propose to him, but
he was capable to accept of it. It is evident also, there is either
an explicit compact between some men and the devil; horrible sins
covered with religion bring utter despair at last. Desperation in
hell in “fieri.” Some men as well as devils are tormented before the
time. Let us not count the less of religion, that it is made a cloak
for covering sin; let us beware that such a man’s fall prove not a
neck-break to us; let us idolize no man for his profession, or that
he is of this or that persuasion, or of such a party: let no man rest
in a bare profession of religion. Men in compact with the devil, may
be assisted both to preach and pray. The devil’s servants are well
rewarded at the last. Profession and practice must go together; a
clinking profession, with an unbridled tongue, is a vain religion.
“Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is, to
visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction; and for a
man to keep himself unspotted from the world.”

Major Weir was burnt between Edinburgh and Leith, at a place called
the Gallowlee, on Thursday the 14th of April 1676.




XXXVIII.—_An Apparition seen in a dwelling-house, in Mary King’s
Close, in Edinburgh._


Sir, within these few years, there was one T. C. by profession an
agent about the session-house; who about flitting time, was removing
his furniture from a lower part of the city to an higher. One in
the aforesaid close, seeing his maid on the Saturday carrying some
light furniture to such a house, asked her, if she was to dwell in
that house? “Yes,” said she; “for I am hired for this half-year.”
Her friend told her, “If you live there, I assure you, you will have
more company than yourselves.” And after twice or thrice more going
up and down, getting several informations anent the business, she
was persuaded to tell her mistress, she would not tarry a servant in
that house, it being haunted with a spirit or ghost, and gave her the
ground of her intelligence.

The mistress informed her husband, desiring him to forbear that
house, lest she should be affrighted even with apprehensions; but
he, out of a natural courage, and fortitude of mind, smiled at
the relation, and resolved to tarry, lodging there that very same
night.——To-morrow being the Sabbath-day, they went both to church
in the forenoon; but in the afternoon, he being indisposed, fitted
himself for a sleep; his wife took the Bible; and at the head of the
table near the bed, resolved to spend the time in reading of the
Holy Scripture, appointing the servant to go to church, which she
did, but came no more to the family.—As the mistress was reading
to herself, she chanced to cast her eyes to a little chamber-door
just over against her, where she spied the head and face of an old
man, grey headed, with a grey beard, looking straight upon her, the
distance being very short; at which sight, she endeavouring to awaken
her husband, fell in a swoon and fainted, and lay in that posture
till she heard some of her neighbours open their doors after sermon
was ended; then she told her husband what was done, and what she had
seen, the apparition being evanished; he pleaded it was some fancy,
or delusion of her senses, and bade her be of good courage.—After
supper, both being alone, the goodwife’s fear still continuing, she
built on a large fire, and went to bed. After a little time, the
goodman cast his eyes towards the chimney, and spied that same old
man’s head in the former place. He told his wife, who was like to
fall into her former passion. He rising, lighteth a candle, sets it
on the table, and went to his bed again, encouraging themselves in
the Lord; and recommended themselves to God’s care and protection.
After an hour and more was spent thus; they clearly perceived a young
child, with a coat upon it, hanging near to the old man’s head. At
which sight, the goodman, Tom, flew out of his bed, and his wife
after him. He taking her in his arms, kneeled down before the bed,
and with fervent devotion, they entreated the Lord to be freed from
that temptation. He lighted a second candle, the first being spent,
and knocked upon his neighbours; but getting no answer, they both
returned to their bed, where they both kneeled down and prayed; an
excessive fear and sweat being upon them.—By and by a naked arm
appears in the air, from the elbow downward, and the hand stretched
out, as when one man is about to salute another. He then skipped out
of his bed, and kneeling down, begged help from heaven. The arm had
now come within its own length to him, as it were to shake hands with
him. Whereupon, he immediately goes to bed again, and at the opening
of the curtain, it offered another salutation to him. The man and the
wife embracing one another through fear, and still eyeing the naked
arm, they prayed the more earnestly. But the cubit offering to touch
him, he was in such a consternation and amazement, that he was as one
distracted; but taking some courage from God, he boldly spake to it
after this manner: “In the name of the living God, and of our Saviour
Jesus Christ, tell me why thou troublest my family? To my knowledge,
I never wronged any man, by killing or cheating; but hath lived
honestly in the world. If thou hast received any wrong, if I can
right thee, I will do my utmost for thee; but trouble me no more.”
Notwithstanding of this, the arm and hand, came nearer than before,
still after a courteous manner, with an offer of acquaintance. They
fell to prayer again, both of them being drowned with sweat; and in
the mean time, they saw a little dog come out of that little room
afore-named; which, after a little time looking about towards the bed
and the naked arm, composed itself upon a chair, as it were with its
nose in its tail to sleep. This somewhat increased their fear. But
quickly after, a cat comes leaping out from the same room, and in the
midst of the hall, began to play some little tricks. Then was the
hall full of small little creatures dancing prettily; unto which none
of them could give a name, as having never in nature seen the like.

It is not possible to narrate the height of passion and fear these
two were under, having all the apparitions at once in their eye,
which continued a long time. The honest couple went to their knees
again within the bed; there being no standing in the floor of the
room. In the time of prayer, their ears were started with a deep,
dreadful, and loud groan, as of a strong man dying; at which, all the
apparitions and visions at once evanished; and, as the honest couple
thought, they retired to the little room from whence they came,
and the house was quiet.—After this, they both went hand in hand
to the little room where the drink stood, and refreshed themselves
therewith. After they had taken a second draught, the husband said,
“My dear, God hath made me this night to bear that which would have
frighted to death the stoutest of them all.” The day approaching,
they dressed themselves, and made no secret of it. But looking back
upon what happened, they wondered, that none of them had wit to open
the door, and to flee from the house, which had been easier done than
to light the first candle. But they behoved to undergo this trial,
having no power to escape it. And by this means, the goodman had the
courage to dwell in the house after till he died; yet would never
want some good fellows or others with him, concluding the worst was
over; as indeed it was.—A few weeks after, he, on a Sabbath day, went
with his wife to Corstorphine, a village two miles from Edinburgh,
to hear sermon. In the evening, he took some refreshment there at a
public inn; and stepping to the door to ease nature, he was instantly
surprized with a vehement shivering and trembling in all his joints.
Coming from the end of the aforesaid village, with a purpose to come
home, he was accompanied with some crows flying above him, almost
keeping pace with him, till he came to Portsburgh, a part of the
suburbs of the city, where they left him, and returned to their own
lodging. “These crows, my dear (says he) do prognosticate, that
I must die shortly.” He fell sick of a pain in his head, with an
excessive aking. But before I go further on this narration, I must
make a visit to the country.—A gentleman near Tranent, or in it, a
town about seven miles from Edinburgh, whose agent this man was, in
managing his law-affairs, and keeped his papers for that effect, had
a singular kindness for Thomas, as he had for him. This gentleman
being in bed one morning with his wife, his nurse and a child lying
in a truckle-bed near them, the nurse was affrighted with something
like a cloud moving up and down the room; but not shaped as such. She
called to her master and his wife, and awakened them. He seeing the
cloud figured like a man, nimbly skipped over the bed, and drew his
sword; and going to bed again, laid it by his side, and recommended
the family to God. For a time it continued in the forementioned dark
form; but, anon, they all saw perfectly the body of a man walking up
and down. The gentleman behaved himself more like a Christian than a
combatant. At last, this apparition looked him fully and perfectly in
the face, and stood by him with a ghostly and pale countenance; at
which the gentleman with great courage, said to the spectre, “What
art thou? Art thou my dear friend Thomas Coltheart?” (For so was
the agent called.) “Art thou dead, my friend? Tell me if thou hast
any commission to me from Almighty God, tell it me, and it shall be
welcome.” The ghost held up its hand three times, waving and shaking
it towards him, and immediately disappeared. This was done about the
very hour (as was guessed) of the agent’s death.

The Sunday after his death, among many accompanying his corpse to
the common burial place, some of the town ministers were there, and
by chance a friend of his thanked one of them for his attendance;
and said, “Sir, it was a pity that some of you saw him not before
he died.” The minister asked him, “If any remarkable thing was
the cause of his sickness” So much was told, as gave the minister
ground to make a visit to his widow; who made him very welcome
with tears in her eyes. After she had composed herself, he prayed.
Prayer being ended, she began the before related story, and told
it from the beginning. But when she came to the dog’s part, she
telling him, that he was just now sitting upon the chair where the
dog lay sleeping, the minister rises up, and taking the mistress by
the hand, “Come, (said he) I have seen his chair; in the name of
Almighty God, I will see his chamber too;” and so went in to see
the little room from which the apparition came, and to which they
returned; in which room she gave the minister an account of what
followed the dog. In the mean time a gentleman came in, whom she knew
by his voice, and running to him with great fervour, they embraced
one another affectionately with tears. To make an end, this stranger
was the gentleman to whom the ghost of the deceased husband appeared
about Tranent, the very hour when he was expiring at Edinburgh. He
told likewise, that that morning the ghost appeared to him, he
was resolved to attend the Duke of Lauderdale from Lithingtown to
Edinburgh; but this apparition discomposing his wife, he could not.
But With his first conveniency (he told her) he had come in to see
her, and get an account of his being touched with what he saw at his
house.

These things coming to the Duke of Lauderdale’s ears, as remarkable
stories, he called for that minister, and had the same account of the
particulars, before many of the nobility, narrated to him.




XXXIX.—_An Apparition of a deceased Wife to her Husband, at
Edinburgh._


Sir, that which I narrated to you the other day, I have now sent
it under my hand, as a thing very certain and sure. I knew a
servant-maid, that served a gentlewoman in the old Provost’s Close,
as they call it, who was married to a butcher called John Ritchie,
about twelve years ago. She lived about five years with him, and
had four children to him, and then died. Within a few days after
her burial, he went in suit of a young woman, courting her for
marriage. He had a comrade of the same trade, to whom he revealed
his intention, and desired him to meet him at such a house, near
to the court of guard, down some close or other, that he might see
his new mistress. The appointment was keeped. The two lovers sat
down together on a bed-side, and the comrade sat opposite to them,
there being a table between them, and a window or shot at the head
of the room, that gave them light; the close or wynd was narrow to
which they had a sight. And while they two are dallying together
in the bed, the other smiling at them; behold, while this man is
casting his eye about the room, he perceived distinctly the body and
face of the dead wife, in her clothes, looking towards them from an
opposite window; at which this man, his comrade, rose up affrighted,
saying to the other, “John, what’s that?” Whereupon all stood up
looking, and saw perfectly the buried woman lifting up her hands
(as appeared) to take the dead-dress from her head, but could not
reach it. The man threw the woman out of his arms, with a purpose
to be gone quickly; but his comrade vowed he would not stir till
he got something to comfort his heart: they got a little brandy,
and then went away; not without wondering and fear. Upon this, the
man took sickness for three or four days; and his comrade coming
to give him a visit, counselled him to delay, or wholly to desist
from that purpose of marriage; but affection would not suffer him to
forbear; and, though not fully recovered of his frenzy, he made a
new address to his mistress; but, while he is putting on his shoes,
his dead wife appears again in her ordinary habit; and crossing
the room in his sight, says, “John, will you not come to me?” and
with that evanished. Up on this, he took sickness again, and called
for his comrade, and told him of this second apparition, who most
freely entreated him to desist, or at least to delay. His sickness
increasing, he died. About which time, he spoke of a third visit
his wife gave him, blaming him as if he had too soon forgotten her,
but did not tell it distinctly; and therefore his comrade could
not be positive in it. He was buried within a month of his wife’s
decease.—One of the ministers of Edinburgh, who had been acquaint in
the house where she served, hearing some whisper of the apparition,
sent a servant secretly to call for the man’s comrade, who gave him
a just and true narration of all that I have written; adding, that
having seen the vision first, some told him he would quickly die, but
he is yet living in the town, a flesher; the minister having married
him to two wives since. The deceased wife’s name was Helen Brown. I
intended to have published another relation anent the devil’s coming
in the night-time, and knocking three several times at such a man’s
door; but I was desired to forbear.

Having no kindness for the Cartesian philosophy, I must fall upon it
in the close, as I did in the beginning. I will not name nor cite
the author that maintains the following blasphemous opinions, though
I may; 1st, That there is an infinite intelligible extension, which
is God, in which we see all bodies. 2dly, This author makes Christ
the eternal World, speak in the quality of a Cartesian philosopher.
3dly, He destroys altogether the providence of God. 4thly, He says,
that God hath not made all things for his own glory. 5thly, That it
was necessary that all men should be sinners, that there might be a
diversity of glory. 6thly, Works done without grace are good works.
7thly, God is not the author of every good thing that is in us.
8thly, He destroys the authority of the Scripture, and exposes it
to be despised by the prophane. 9thly, The thoughts of Jesus Christ
are the occasional causes of the distribution of grace. 10thly, God
could have created spirits from all eternity. 11thly, All creatures
are full of Jesus Christ. 12thly, He ruins the nature of sin by
the idea which he gives of liberty. l3thly, That liberty is not
essential to spirit. 14thly, A man transported by his passion doth
not sin. 15thly, Every habit or passion, or temperament, which he
cannot overcome, doth make the most ugly and enormous actions to be
no sins. And thence, sodomy, incest, murder, adultery, rebellion,
witchcraft, are no sins if they be habitual. These are but a few
of his blasphemous and atheistical opinions. This philosophy would
please some now-a-days very well, that habituate themselves in
murder; murdering some in their lodgings, and others on the King’s
highway, as is most unchristianly done by some. “O dementia! hucine
rerum venimus?”




SOME

ADDITIONAL RELATIONS,

WHICH HAVE HAPPENED IN THE

SHIRE OF RENFREW, TOWNS OF PITTENWEEM, CALDER, AND OTHER PLACES.




XL.—_Concerning some Witches in the Shire of Renfrew._


It was about the end of August 1696, Christian Shaw, daughter to
Shaw of Bargarran, in the shire of Renfrew, about eleven years of
age, perceiving one of the maids of the house, named Katharine
Campbell, to steal and drink some milk; she told her mother of
it: Whereupon the maid Campbell (being of a proud and revengeful
humour, and a great curser and swearer) did, in a great rage, thrice
imprecate the curse of God upon the child, and uttered these words,
“The devil harle your soul through hell.”——On Friday following, one
Agnes Nasmith came to Bargarran’s house, where she asked the same
Christian, how the lady and young child was? and how old the young
child was? To which Christian replied, “What do I know?” Then Agnes
asked, How herself did, and how old she was? To which she answered
that she was well, and in the eleventh year of her age.—On Saturday
night thereafter, the child went to bed in good health; but so soon
as she was asleep, began to cry, “Help, help;” and did fly over
the resting-bed where she was lying, with such violence, that her
brains had been dashed out, if a woman had not broke the force of
the child’s motion, and remained as if she had been dead, for the
space of half an hour. After this she was troubled with sore pains,
except in some short intervals. And when any of the people present
touched any part of her body, she did cry and screech with such
vehemence, as if they had been killing her, but could not speak.—Some
days thereafter she fell a crying, that Catharine Campbell and Agnes
Nasmith were cutting her side and other parts of her body. In this
condition she continued a month, with some variation, both as to the
fits and intervals.—She did thrust out of her mouth parcels of hair,
some curled, some plaited, some knotted, of different colours, and
in large quantities; and likewise coal-cinders, about the bigness
of a chesnut; some whereof were so hot, that they could scarcely
be handled. One of which, Dr. Brisbane being by her when she took
it out of her mouth, felt to be hotter than any one’s body could
make it.—The girl continued a long time in this condition, till the
government began to take notice of it, and gave commission to some
honourable gentleman for the trial of these two, and several others
concerned in these hellish practices; (which I shall, for brevity’s
sake, omit to mention) and being brought before the judges, two of
their accomplices confessed the crime; whereupon they were condemned
and executed.




XLI.—_Concerning the Witches of Pittenweem._


Peter Morton, smith at Pittenweem, being desired by one Beattie
Laing to do some work for her, which he refused, excusing himself in
respect he had been pre-engaged to serve a ship with nails, within a
certain time, so that till he had finished that work, he could not
engage in any other; that notwithstanding, the said Beattie Laing
declared herself dissatisfied, and vowed revenge. The said Peter
Morton, afterward being indisposed, coming by the door, saw a small
vessel full of water, and a coal of fire slockened in the water;
so perceiving an alteration in his health, and remembering Beattie
Laing’s threatenings, he presently suspects devilry in the matter,
and quarrels the thing. Thereafter, finding his indispositions
growing worse and worse, being tormented and pricked as if with
bodkins and pins, he openly lays the blame upon witchcraft, and
accuses Beattie Laing. He continued to be tormented, and she was by
warrant apprehended, with others in Pittenweem. No natural reason
could be given for his distemper, his face and neck being dreadfully
distorted, his back prodigiously rising and falling, his belly
swelling and falling on a sudden; his joints pliable, and instantly
so stiff, as no human power could bow them. Beattie Laing and her
hellish companions being in custody, were brought to the room where
he was; and his face covered, he told his tormentors were in the
room, naming them. And though formerly no confession had been made,
Beattie Laing confessed her crime, and accused several others as
accessory.—The said Beattie having confessed her compact with the
devil, and using of spells; and particularly her slockening the
coal in water; she named her associates in revenge, against Peter
Morton, viz. Janet Corset, Lillie Wallace, and —— Lawson, had framed
a picture of wax, and every one of the forenamed persons having put
their pin in the picture for torture. They could not tell what had
become of the image, but thought the devil had stolen it, whom they
had seen in the prison.—Beattie Laing likewise said, that one Isobel
Adams, a young lass, was also in compact with the devil. This woman
was desired to fee with Beattie, which she refused: and Beattie
let her see a man at the other end of the table, who appeared as a
gentleman, and promised her all prosperity in the world: she promised
her service to him; and he committed uncleanness with her, (which
she said no other had done before) and he put his mark in her flesh,
which was very painful. She was shortly after ordered to attend the
company to go to one M’Grigor’s house to murder him. He awakening
when they were there, and recommending himself to God, they were
forced to withdraw. This Isobel Adams appeared ingenuous and very
penitent in her confession; she said, he who forgave Manasseh’s
witchcrafts, might forgive her’s also; and died very penitent, and to
the satisfaction of many.

This Beattie Laing was suspected by her husband, long before she was
laid in prison by warrant of the magistrates. The occasion was this;
she said, that she had packs of wool coming from Leith to her, which
she was to sell at Auchtermuchty fair; and they being longsome in
coming to the market, he said, “It would not be in time to the fair.”
She desired him to go to the market, for she was sure her merchant
would not fail her. He went off long before her; and when he came
to the town, he found her before him, and two packs of very good
wool, which she instantly sold; and coming home with a black horse
which she had with her, they drinking till it was late in the night
ere they came home, the man said, “What shall I do with the horse?”
She replied, “Cast the bridle on his neck, and you will be quit of
him.” And, as her husband thought, the horse flew with a great noise
away in the air.——They were, by a complaint to the Privy Council,
prosecute by her Majesty’s Advocate 1704, but all set at liberty,
save one, who died in prison, in Pittenweem. Beatie Laing died
undesired, in her bed, in St. Andrew’s; all the rest died miserable
and violent deaths.




XLII.—_Concerning the bewitching of a Child in Ireland._


At Antrim, in Ireland, a girl of ninteen years of age, inferior to
none in the place for beauty, education, and birth, innocently eat a
leaf of sorrel, which she got from a witch, after she had given the
begging witch bread and beer at the door: it was scarcely swallowed
by her, but she began to be tortured in her bowels, to tremble all
over, and even was convulsive; and, in fine to swoon away, as dead.
The doctors used remedies on the 9th of May 1698, at which time it
happened, but to no purpose. The child continued in a most terrible
paroxysm: Whereupon they sent for a minister, who scarce had laid
his hand on her, when she was turned by the demon, in the most
dreadful shapes. She began first to roll herself about, then to vomit
horse-dung, needles, pins, hairs, feathers, bottoms of thread, pieces
of glass, window-nails, nails drawn out of a cart or coach wheel, an
iron-knife, above a span long, eggs, and fish shells. And when the
wretch (I should have said the witch) came near the place, or looked
to the house, though at the distance of 200 paces from the house
where the child was, she was in worse torment, insomuch, that no
life was expected for the child, till the witch was removed to some
greater distance.——This Witch was apprehended, condemned, strangled,
and burnt; and was desired to undo the incantation, immediately
before strangling; but said she could not, by reason others had done
against her likewise: But the wretch confessed the same, with many
more. The child was about the middle of September thereafter, carried
to a gentleman’s house, where there were many other things happened
scarce credible, but that several ministers, and the gentleman, have
attested the same. The relation is to be seen in a pamphlet printed
1699, entitled, “The bewitching of a child in Ireland.”




XLIII.—_Concerning the Witch of Calder._


This famous witch of Calder, is not to be altogether passed by. This
horrible slave of Satan was first suspected by her neighbours, and
then her horrible witchcrafts were found to the conviction of many,
and direful experience of my Lord Torphichen’s family.—She had a
child died, which she gave to the devil, not only the soul, but the
corpse, without a burying.——She put an incantation upon the aforesaid
honourable Lord’s son, so that he was the terror, as well as the
grief of the family. This child was in a room with his sisters; he
told them, he knew what was doing by others absent; the daughters
told their Lady-mother. I forbear to tell all I had from an eye
and ear witness; but this one I cannot pass. The son was tormented
extremely, and at length, his pedagogue sitting up with him one
night, and being sleepy, he saw a flash of fire at the window; but
thinking the child was asleep, continued to watch more carefully;
and, as he thought, in a little time, the same fire appeared at the
window; the child was awake in bed, and told him, he had been at
Torryburn in the time. This child was several times taken away. He
told the family when he was to be taken away at other times; and
sometimes, even then, though they waited on him, he appeared to be
lifted up in the air, to be taken from them. This witch being taken
into custody, she then discovered others, who are all dead.

She was examined by the minister of the parish, and several others;
but was brutishly ignorant, and scarce knew any thing, but her
witchcraft. There was one day, that this child was waited on, when
he was to be taken away, they kept the door and window close; but
a certain person going to the door, he made shift and got to the
door, and was lifted in the air, but was catched by the heels and
coat-tails, and brought back.—There were many and dreadful things
happened to this child, which I forbear to mention, on account of
the honourable family, and that it is too late, and in every body’s
head.—When the witch was examined about the corpse of her child, she
said, the corpse were buried; but the wright that made the coffin,
declared, That she put nothing in the coffin but clouts. Then she
said, “The child being long pined, and all flesh taken off by the
sickness, it appeared but clouts; yet, at length she confessed, that
she gave the corpse as well as the soul to the devil, which he said
he was to make a roast of. She, with all her hellish accomplices,
died in custody, after they had confessed many amazing incantations,
and horrible unheard of witchcrafts.


FINIS.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  TOC number 17 Changed Hataraick, on old Warlock to: Hattaraick
  pg 3 Removed unneeded quote before: It was the deed of the
         “dumb girl.”
  pg 5 Added apostrophe in: clay one in her brothers: brother’s
  pg 8 Changed subscribed by the two notars public to: notary
  pg 9 Changed white hand-cuffs, and hoggers to: hoggars
  pg 10 Changed new name given to himself was Jones to: Jonas
  pg 10 Changed Bessie Weir in his bed-straw. to: bedstraw.
  pg 12 Added quote after: How she had win to the bolster?
  pg 14 Changed wash them, but seing to: seeing
  pg 28 Changed chapter heading from VII. to VIII.
  pg 30 Added quote after: I replied, What, my major?
  pg 30 Added quote after: “Captain, captain,
  pg 31 Changed his guilt, and confesssion to: confession
  pg 32 Changed with a genttleman to: gentleman
  pg 35 Added colon after: ingenuity in him was this
  pg 37 Added quote after: chusing rather to die than live; and
          so died.
  pg 42 Changed pin that it was fasttened to: fastened
  pg 43 Added period after: before it came down
  pg 61 Moved quote from: “Not thine, answered the other,” to:
          “Not thine,” answered the other,
  pg 61 Added quote before: but in obedience to God
  pg 62 Added period after: considering what to do
  pg 68 Added missing e after: amiss to insert it her  now: here
  pg 69 Changed  it was supposed has to: his
  pg 70 Added period after: I will do you no harm
  pg 71 Added quote after: I will meet you some other time.
  pg 74 Changed chapter heading XVI. to: XV.
  pg 83 Changed XVII.—Anent Hataraick to: Hattaraick
  pg 87 Added period after Dr in: Dr Breton, late rector of Ludgate
  pg 87 Added quote before: That she had business
  pg 90 Changed clothes, stature, mein to: mien
  pg 90 Changed journey-man in such cases uses to: used
  pg 90 Changed hung in the shop, put in on to: put it on
  pg 93 Changed bid them to he down to: be down
  pg 94 Changed he had no knowlege to: knowledge
  pg 98 Changed at the minister’s back-yait to: back-yard
  pg 99 Changed was thrown at the lad’s bedstead to: bed-stead
  pg 100 Added period after: trouble found about the family
  pg 104 Changed chapter heading from XXV. to: XXII.
  pg 107 Changed in the likeness of a oungman to: youngman
  pg 108 Changed which she bad him spend to: which she had him spend
  pg 109 Changed taken with him, who delcared to: declared
  pg 110 Changed chapter heading from XXV. to: XXVI.
  pg 110 Removed quote after: and it will grow meikle.
  pg 110 Changed French Gentlemen, his two comerades to: comrades
  pg 111 Changed The next morning the two comerades to: comrades
  pg 124 Changed deal with them in the same manaer to: manner
  pg 124 Added period after XXIX
  pg 129 Added quote after: I know nothing to the contrary.
  pg 134 Changed Magdalen Pans, where sh died to: she died
  pg 135 Changed XXX. to: XXXIII.
  pg 135 Added quote before: I asked her, how she came to the knowledge
  pg 136 Added quote after: in Glasgow of that name?
  pg 140 Added ) after: when he spoke of it
  pg 141 Added XXXV. to chapter heading
  pg 143 Changed One comes in the lkeness to: likeness
  pg 145 Added period after: All is done that we have ready
  pg 147 Added period after: but went about to shun it
  pg 148 Added period after: a a street so called there
  pg 148 Removed repeated letter a from: a a street so called there
  pg 149 Changed devil your master too,” who  d to: did
  pg 150 Added period after: “Torment me not before the time”
  pg 152 Changed  her body with a vehement cahination to: cachinnation
  pg 155 Changed I please, on my forehead? to: forehead.”
  pg 157 Changed Foul faults must have a cloke to: cloak
  pg 157 Added period after: only of that sin mentioned, Rom
  pg 163 Changed the cause of his sicknes to: sickness
  pg 167 Added quote after: “O dementia! hucine rerum venimus?
  pg 168 Changed Concerning some Witches in the Shire of Renfrere
           to: Renfrew

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SATAN'S INVISIBLE WORLD
DISCOVERED; ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
